
Also available as a printed book 

see title verso for ISBN details 



Authority and the Individual 



Russell at Routledge 

The following books by Bertrand Russell are available from 
Routledge in paperback: 

ABC Relativity 

Analysis of Matter 

Analysis of Mind 

Authority and the Individual 

Basic Writings of Bertrand Russell 

Bertrand Russell’s Best 

Common Sense and Nuclear Warfare 

Conquest of Happiness 

Education and the Social Order 

Fact and Fiction 

Foundations of Geometry 

A History of Western Philosophy 

Human Knowledge 

Human Society in Ethics and Politics 

Impact of Science on Society 

In Praise of Idleness 

An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth 

Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy 

Logic and Knowledge 

Marriage and Morals 

Mortals and Others, volume 1 

Mortals and Others, volume 2 

My Philosophical Development 

Mysticism and Logic 

On Education 



Our Knowledge of the External World 
An Outline of Philosophy 
Philosophical Essays 
The Philosophy of Leibniz 
Political Ideals 
Power 

Principles of Mathematics 

Principles of Social Reconstruction 

Prospects of Industrial Civilization 

Roads to Freedom 

Sceptical Essays 

The Scientific Outlook 

Theory of Knowledge 

Unpopular Essays 

Why I am Not a Christian 



Authority and the 
Individual 


BERTRAND RUSSELL 
with an introduction by 
Kirk Willis 




© 

* Franck 


tri 


LONDON AND NEW YORK 


First published 1 949 
Second impression 1955 
First published in paperback 1964 
Sixth impression 1974 

Rout I edge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Croup 

This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2005. 

“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or 
Routledge’s collection of thousands of eBooks please go to 
www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.” 

Introduction © 1995 Kirk Willis 

All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or 
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic 
mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter 
invented, including photocopying and recording, or in any 
information storage or retrieval system, without permission in 
writing from the publishers. 

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 

Library of Congress Cataloguing in Publication Data 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the Library of 

Congress 

ISBN 0-203-98879-5 Master e-book ISBN 


ISBN 0-41 5-1 1 956-1 (Print Edition) 



Contents 


Prefatory Note vii 

Introduction 1 

1 Social Cohesion and Human Nature 1 1 

2 Social Cohesion and Government 23 

3 The Role of Individuality 37 

4 The Conflict of Technique and Human Nature 49 

5 Control and Initiative: their Respective Spheres 67 

6 Individual and Social Ethics 81 


Prefatory Note 


In the preparation of these lectures I have had the benefit of 
vital assistance by my wife, Patricia Russell, not only as 
regards details, but as regards the general ideas and their 
application to the circumstances of the present day. 



VIII 



Introduction 


For nearly fifty years, the Reith Lectures have enjoyed a 
distinguished place in the cultural life of modern Britain. 
Traditionally delivered deep in the autumn and early 
winter, they honour the founding Director of the BBC, John 
Reith. Proud, imperious, and vindictive, Reith was an 
autocratic administrator and formidable personality who 
succeeded brilliantly both in bruising the sensibilities of 
subordinates and overseers alike and in creating one of 
Britain’s most admired and durable institutions. True to 
Reith’s insistence that the BBC make available to its 
audience the most eminent of speakers on the most 
wideranging of subjects, the Reith lecturers have been 
chosen for the breadth of their interests, the mastery of 
their subjects, and the ease of their ability to make difficult 
issues intelligible to a broad audience. Since 1948, the 
British public has therefore been enlightened by 
anthropologists and zoologists, astronomers and 
diplomats, art historians and economists, theologians and 
tycoons. 

That the Reith Lectures would become so enduring an 
institution was certainly the ambition— if not honestly the 
expectation— of their creator: the Board of Governors of the 
BBC. To the Board, in the difficult early months of post-war 
readjustment, the establishment of the lectures was 
intended not merely to honour Reith but, more 
importantly, to contribute to the understanding of a 
radically different world— a world of Labour governments 
and atomic energy, of European reconstruction and 
superpower rivalry, of imperialistic challenges and 
economic degradation Their ambition, indeed, was to 



2 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


create an annual radio version of the Gifford Lectures— an 
accessible statement, aimed at a wide audience, by some 
of Britain’s most original thinkers and creative researchers. 
To inaugurate the series, and thereby both to set the tone 
and to establish the credentials of the lectures, the Board 
invited Britain’s most celebrated public intellectual — 
Bertrand Russell. 

Such a position in the good graces of the cultural and 
intellectual elite of twentieth-century Britain was at once a 
pleasure and a novelty for Russell. Indeed, the decade 
immediately after the end of the Second World War marked 
a rare moment of public respectability for Russell, whose 
reputation— scholarly, political, and personal— had 
fluctuated (and would continue to fluctuate) wildly over the 
course of his extraordinarily long life. Born in 1872 into 
one of the most eminent and secure families of Britain’s 
Whig aristocracy, Russell had made his intellectual 
reputation in the two decades before the outbreak of the 
Great War. Ensconced in a Cambridge lectureship in logic 
and the philosophy of mathematics created especially for 
him, he had enjoyed two decades of uninterrupted 
intellectual achievement. With works ranging from An Essay 
on the Foundations of Geometry (1 897), to A Critical 
Exposition of the Philosophy of Leibniz (1 900), to The 
Principles of Mathematics (1903), to The Problems of 
Philosophy ( 1 91 2), to Principia Mathematica (3 vols, 1 91 0- 
13), to over thirty major articles in British, French, Italian, 
and American journals, Russell had won renown not simply 
as a formidable logician possessed of a rare technical 
sophistication and an even rarer stylistic virtuosity but as 
the chief proponent of a new and powerful technique of 
intellectual discourse— analytic philosophy. On the eve of 
the First World War, indeed, Russell had been indisputably 
the most celebrated and influential philosopher in the 
English-speaking world. 

The outbreak of the Great War, however, had transformed 
Russell’s life; if his philosophical work had brought him 
fame, the Great War made him notorious. Although never 
an archetypically cloistered Cambridge don— he had been 
active in the tariff reform campaign in 1903 and the 
women’s suffrage movement from 1907 and had begun an 



INTRODUCTION B 


aborted campaign for Parliament in 1910— Russell had 
none the less not been a public man. But as Britain 
marched remorselessly to war in the summer of 1914, 
Russell threw himself first into the neutrality campaign and 
then into the anti-war movement— speaking, writing, 
organizing, and counselling. No pacifist, Russell 
passionately believed that this particular war— not all war — 
was a mistake; indeed, it offended his every political 
instinct and moral principle. And as the war lengthened 
and Britain’s commitment extended, Russell’s opposition 
had sharpened— to mistreatment of conscientious 
objectors, to the suppression of civil liberties, and to the 
wastefulness of British commanders. This opposition- 
strident, unrelenting, and bitterly unpopular— was the 
defining experience of Russell’s life; not merely did 
emotions run so high on all sides that Russell alienated 
friends, exasperated allies, and infuriated authorities, but 
his appreciation that the war was genuinely popular with the 
vast majority of his fellow subjects at once appalled and 
captivated him. To explain that popularity— to account for 
the belligerence and xenophobia of the British public and 
to fathom their susceptibility to the exaggerations of the 
Press lords and their indifference to the centralizing 
tendencies of their government— had become Russell’s 
central intellectual and political task in the years after 1 91 8. 

The inter-war years had therefore seen a very different 
Russell devoted to a very different sort of work. Self- 
consciously determined to become the Voltaire of the 
twentieth century, Russell had engaged directly— and often 
in a very public manner— with an astonishing range of 
issues in an effort to reconstruct society and regenerate 
individuals so as to prevent a second military catastrophe. 
Lecturing, writing, teaching, and travelling, Russell sent 
forth not solitary spies but battalions of words to do battle 
—on political theory ( Roads to Freedom (1918) and Power 
(1938)), on economic change ( The Prospects of Industrial 
Civilization (1923)), on history ( Freedom and Organization 
1814-1914 (1934)), on the future of Asia ( The Problem of 
China (1922)), on Russia ( The Practice and Theory of 
Bolshevism (1 920)), on education (On Education (1 926) and 
Education and the Social Order (1 932)), on marriage and 



4 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


sexuality ( Marriage and Morals (1 929)), on mathematics (An 
Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy (1919)), on 
fascism ( Which Way to Peace? ( 1936)), on science (The ABC 
ofAtoms( 1923), Icarus (1 924), The ABC of Relativity (1925), 
and The Scientific Outlook (1931)), on popular philosophy 
(Analysis of Mind (1 921) and Outline of Philosophy (1 927)), 
and on religion (What i Believe (1925)). Although much of 
this writing and most of the journalism which 
supplemented it proved evanescent, it none the less 
reached a wide audience and served to heighten Russell’s 
notoriety still further; indeed, for all that his liberal views 
on religion, ethics, and sexuality had attracted the young, 
independent, and free-thinking, they had also offended the 
comfortable, conforming, and established. 

The outbreak of the Second World War had found Russell 
teaching in America. Eager to return to Britain and 
embroiled in controversy over his popular writings, Russell 
had been prohibited from returning by a British government 
all too willing to remember his earlier antiwar opinions and 
activities but not to believe his current —and quite genuine 
—protestations of support for this conflict against Nazi 
Germany and Fascist Italy. He had therefore remained in 
America until the summer of 1 944— writing, lecturing, 
teaching, and preparing the mammoth manuscript of what 
would become his most widely-read book, History of 
Western Philosophy (1 945). 

Russell had returned not simply to England but to 
Cambridge, and not merely to Cambridge but to Trinity 
College— where he had been an undergraduate in the 
1890s and a don in the 1910s, and from which he had 
been driven in 1 91 6 by a governing body unable to tolerate 
his anti-war opinions. Invited by his old undergraduate 
friend and the current Master of Trinity, G.M. Trevelyan, 
Russell had recognized and happily accepted the fellowship 
offered him for what it was— an amends for earlier wrongs 
and a testimony to his continued standing as one of the 
preeminent philosophers of the twentieth century. To 
return to England, to Trinity, to Newton’s own rooms in the 
immediate aftermath of the invasion of France and final 
stages of the defeat of Germany meant much to Russell, 
who had left the Britain of the late 1930s sour and 



INTRODUCTION 5 


pessimistic— angry at the evasions of British foreign and 
defence policies, dismayed at the incapacity and 
unwillingness of National governments to relieve pervasive 
social and economic misery, and of two minds whether to 
raise his children as British subjects. But by 1944 that low, 
dishonest decade had passed, and the quick succession of 
Allied victory, Labour triumph, and publishing success of 
the History of Western Philosophy all combined to lift 
Russell’s spirits and to allow his natural resilience and 
optimism to blossom forth lavishly. 

At Trinity Russell had been received warmly by old 
friends and those few students not in military service. With 
the war’s end, followed hard by Labour’s victory and the 
History’s success, Russell found himself lionized. Not 
expected by the college authorities either to teach or to 
lecture, Russell threw himself into both with a vigour and 
enthusiasm astonishing in a man of seventy-two. To his 
delight, he won a ready and receptive audience. 
Introductory lecture courses on such subjects as ethics, 
epistemology, and the fundamentals of philosophy filled 
the largest lecture rooms Cambridge possessed to 
overflowing. Derived in their essentials from his History of 
Western Philosophy (itself largely a compilation of 
American lectures), Russell’s lectures were memorable 
performances —lucid, witty, irreverent, full of sweeping 
themes and picturesque asides, and delivered with a brio 
that managed at one to enthrall his audience and to 
incarnate the moral seriousness and intellectual grandeur 
of philosophical study. To his listeners at Cambridge and 
readers across the English-speaking world, Russell— the 
grandson of Lord John Russell and godchild of John Stuart 
Mill— quickly came to seem not merely a living connection 
with Britain’s political and cultural greatness, but the robust 
embodiment of a western culture that had prevailed over 
the evils of fascism and vanquished the horrors of nazism. 
Russell had thus come to be seen— and to see himself— not 
as a gadfly or a renegade but as an ornament of a 
triumphant Britain now determined to build a wholly new 
society on the sturdy and enduring foundations of the 
past. 



6 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


An appreciation of Russell’s unique standing as well as of 
his new mellowness soon spread far beyond Cambridge, 
driven in large measure by the remarkable sales of the 
History of Western Philosophy— sales limited only by the 
shortage of paper in an economically bereft Britain. Russell 
therefore soon found himself a favourite lecturer of the 
British Council and, unimaginably to anyone alive in 1916, 
of the Foreign Office; at their behest, Russell travelled in 
the next years to Switzerland, Norway, Germany, and 
France to lecture on such topics as ‘Culture and the State’ 
and ‘Ethics and Power’. 

It was in this context of renewed respectability that the 
BBC discovered Russell. Firmly beyond their pale in 
the 1920s and 1930s, Russell had been shunned by Reith 
and his successors as a dangerous radical bristling with 
extreme opinions. Now apparently more moderate and 
trustworthy, he was invited to appear on the popular Brains 
Trust programme late in 1944. So successful did his 
appearance prove to be, that he was almost immediately 
asked to broadcast on ‘The Future of Civilization’ and then 
to debate such worthies as J.B.S. Haldane and Frederick 
Copleston. To the delight of BBC engineers and directors, 
Russell proved to be an almost model broadcaster- 
punctual, informed, lively, and provocative without being 
outrageous. By the end of 1946 it seemed the BBC could 
not get enough of him, and in January 1947 Russell 
complained of overwork ‘as the BBC has developed a 
passion for me’. 1 It was therefore out of this popularity— 
both within Broadcasting House and without —that he was 
invited to be the inaugural Reith lecturer. 

The lectures were given as six half-hour talks on 
successive Sunday evenings beginning on Boxing Day 1 948. 
Written out completely beforehand and delivered in 
Russell’s somewhat reedy yet unnervingly precise voice, 
they were devoted to a theme about which he and other 
liberal thinkers had thought long and hard: how is it 
possible to ‘combine that degree of individual initiative 
which is necessary for progress with the degree of social 
cohesion that is necessary for survival.’ Russell’s lectures, 
that is, were neither a progress report drawn from an 
ongoing programme of research (as would be those of J.Z. 


INTRODUCTION 7 


Young in 1950 and Peter Medawar in 1959) nor a 
culminating statement of a lifetime’s academic or 
professional work (as would be those of Bernard Lovell in 
1958 and Alastair Buchan in 1973). They were, rather, the 
product of a full forty years of reflection about the relations 
of individuals and the state and about the evolving forms 
power and authority have taken in the twentieth 
century. Russell’s lectures, that is, neither summarized 
current research, nor presented new conclusions, nor laid 
out a new line of inquiry. Instead, they distilled his earlier 
thinking, drew together themes he had discussed in the 
inter-war years, meditated on the legacies of totalitarian 
states (both vanquished and extant), and explained the 
challenges liberal societies faced in the remaining decades 
of the twentieth century. 

As Russell confessed early in his lectures, questions 
concerning the proper balance of state power (‘authority’) 
and human freedom (‘the individual’) have been at the 
heart of liberal political theory since at least the 
seventeenth century. But Russell’s discussion of them in 
1948 possessed an extra immediacy— an immediacy that 
helps, in large measure, to account for their quite 
remarkable popularity. Within Britain itself, as his listeners 
were well aware, the advent of the Attlee Government in 
1945 had set Britain on a dramatic new course— of 
nationalized industries and educational reform, of social 
insurance and the National Health Service— which 
cumulatively entailed a sweeping extension of state 
authority over nearly every aspect of British society. The 
implications of that extension— for social cohesion, 
individual initiative, and personal responsibility— were at 
the very heart of an intense, often bitter national debate— a 
debate not merely over the details of specific pieces of 
legislation but also over the values, behaviour, and 
expectations of each and every British subject. Beyond 
Britain, moreover, the establishment of Soviet-style 
regimes in eastern Europe in the late 1940s also prompted 
intense discussion about the nature of totalitarian states 
and the dangers of increased state control, discussion to 
which Arthur Koestler, Karl Popper, and George Orwell, 
among others, would contribute so memorably. In 



8 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


addressing himself to the theme of ‘authority and the 
individual’ Russell was therefore not merely presenting the 
fruits of his own accumulated reflection but also joining an 
impassioned and compelling discussion with the widest 
possible ramifications. 

To read Authority and the Individual is to discover 
Russell at his most characteristic and persuasive— lucid, 
intelligent, serious-minded but not solemn, and concerned 
not with the presentation of detailed schemes for world 
government, local government reform, or charters of 
liberty, but with the clearing away of confusions and the 
articulation of first principles. One discovers Russell, as the 
precise logician and accomplished teacher that he was, 
explaining to us the nature of the questions that must be 
asked before any such schemes can sensibly be fashioned. 
Russell thus leads his readers through such perennial, if 
essential, topics as the formation and purpose of society, 
the nature and function of justice, the scope of education 
and evolution of moral codes, and the mechanisms of 
social, economic, and intellectual progress. He does so, 
moreover, with a clear eye on contemporary realities— on 
technological advances that have at once enhanced the 
state’s capacity for surveillance and enforcement and 
diminished the individual’s ability to withstand that power, 
on transformations in warfare that promise atomic 
armageddon as a consequence of misdirected aggression, 
and on innovations in the arts of advertising, propaganda, 
and media which threaten to weaken our ability and 
willingness to think for ourselves. By the end of his sixth 
lecture Russell has thus provided us with an insightful 
examination of the intellectual, political, and moral 
challenges confronting contemporary western society, a 
stringent warning of the encroaching power of authority in 
all its guises, and a stirring reaffirmation of human liberty 
both as an end in itself and as a means to further human 
progress. 

By any standard the first Reith Lectures were a 
triumphant success. To be sure, John Reith— never an easy 
man to please— complained that Russell had spoken ‘far 
too quickly’ and in ‘a bad voice ’. 2 Critics and listeners, 
however, proved far more admiring. Old friends, ancient 


INTRODUCTION 9 


adversaries, and unknown admirers wrote to Russell in the 
scores, nearly all of them sharing T.S. Eliot’s judgement 
that Russell was ‘one of the few living authors who can 
write English prose’ and endorsing The Times’s 
assessment that the talks marked ‘another landmark in 
broadcasting history’. 3 When a very slightly amended 
version of the lectures appeared in book form as Authority 
and the Individual in the late spring of 1 949, it won both 
critical approval and wide sales, reaching 500 copies a 
week long into the summer. 

As such a gratifying critical reception made plain, 
Authority and the Individual was a timely and powerful 
tract for its times, vindicating the BBCs selection and 
confirming Russell’s newly-found respectability. In its 
forceful and articulate presentation of the inescapable 
tensions between the claims of authority and requirements 
of liberty, moreover, it has only gained in poignancy as our 
troubled century draws to its close. In the scale of its 
ambition, in the wisdom of its analysis, and in the 
inspiration of its conclusions, Authority and the Individual 
still speaks to us eloquently and forcefully. 

Kirk Willis, University of Georgia 


Notes 

1 Quoted in Ronald W.CIark, The Life of Bertrand Russell 
(London, 1975), p. 496. 

2 Charles Stuart, ed., The Reith Diaries (London, 1 975), p. 464. 

3 T.S. Eliot to Russell, 10 June 1949, in The Autobiography of 
Bertrand Russell 1944-1967 (London, 1969), p. 52. The 
quotation from The Times is cited in Caroline Moorehead, 
Bertrand Russell {London, 1992), p. 460. 


10 



Lecture 1 

Social Cohesion and Human 
Nature 


The fundamental problem I propose to consider in these 
lectures is this: how can we combine that degree of 
individual initiative which is necessary for progress with the 
degree of social cohesion that is necessary for survival? I 
shall begin with the impulses in human nature that make 
social co-operation possible. I shall examine first the forms 
that these impulses took in very primitive communities, 
and then the adaptations that were brought about by the 
gradually changing social organisations of advancing 
civilisation. I shall next consider the extent and intensity of 
social cohesion in various times and places, leading up to 
the communities of the present day and the possibilities of 
further development in the not very distant future. After 
this discussion of the forces that hold society together I 
shall take up the other side of the life of Man in 
communities, namely, individual initiative, showing the 
part that it has played in various phases of human 
evolution, the part that it plays at the present day, and the 
future possibilities of too much or too little initiative in 
individuals and groups. I shall then go on to one of the 
basic problems of our times, namely, the conflict which 
modern technique has introduced between organisation 
and human nature, or, to put the matter in another way, 
the divorce of the economic motive from the impulses of 
creation and possession. Having stated this problem, I 
shall examine what can be done towards its solution, and 
finally I shall consider as a matter of ethics the whole 
relation of individual thought and effort and imagination to 
the authority of the community. 



1 2 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


In all social animals, including Man, co-operation and the 
unity of a group has some foundation in instinct. This is 
most complete in ants and bees, which apparently are never 
tempted to anti-social actions and never deviate from 
devotion to the nest or the hive. Up to a point we may 
admire this unswerving devotion to public duty, but it has 
its drawbacks; ants and bees do not produce great works 
of art, or make scentific discoveries, or found religions 
teaching that all ants are sisters. Their social life, in fact, is 
mechanical, precise and static. We are willing that human 
life shall have an element of turbulence if thereby we can 
escape such evolutionary stagnation. 

Early Man was a weak and rare species whose survival at 
first was precarious. At some period his ancestors came 
down from the trees and lost the advantage of prehensile 
toes, but gained the advantage of arms and hands. By 
these changes they acquired the advantage of no longer 
having to live in forests, but on the other hand the open 
spaces into which they spread provided a less abundant 
nourishment than they had enjoyed in the tropical jungles 
of Africa. Sir Arthur Keith estimates that primitive Man 
required two square miles of territory per individual to 
supply him with food, and some other authorities place the 
amount of territory required even higher. Judging by the 
anthropoid apes, and by the most primitive communities 
that have survived into modern times, early Man must have 
lived in small groups not very much larger than families— 
groups which, at a guess, we may put at, say, between fifty 
and a hundred individuals. Within each group there seems 
to have been a considerable amount of co-operation, but 
towards all other groups of the same species there was 
hostility whenever contact occurred. So long as Man 
remained rare, contact with other groups could be 
occasional, and, at most times, not very important. Each 
group had its own territory, and conflicts would only occur 
at the frontiers. In those early times marriage appears to 
have been confined to the group, so that there must have 
been a very great deal of inbreeding, and varieties, 
however originating, would tend to be perpetuated. If a 
group increased in numbers to the point where its existing 
territory was insufficient, it would be likely to come into 



SOCIAL COHESION AND HUMAN NATURE 1 3 


conflict with some neighbouring group, and in such 
conflict any biological advantage which one inbreeding 
group had acquired over the other might be expected to 
give it the victory, and therefore to perpetuate its 
beneficial variation. All this has been very convincingly set 
forth by Sir Arthur Keith. It is obvious that our early and 
barely human ancestors cannot have been acting on a 
thought-out and deliberate policy, but must have been 
prompted by an instinctive mechanism— the dual 
mechanism of friendship within the tribe and hostility to all 
others. As the primitive tribe was so small, each individual 
would know intimately each other individual, so that 
friendly feeling would be co-extensive with 
acquaintanceship. 

The strongest and most instinctively compelling of social 
groups was, and still is, the family. The family is 
necessitated among human beings by the great length of 
infancy, and by the fact that the mother of young infants is 
seriously handicapped in the work of food gathering. It was 
this circumstance that with human beings, as with most 
species of birds, made the father an essential member of 
the family group. This must have led to a division of labour 
in which the men hunted while the women stayed at home. 
The transition from the family to the small tribe was 
presumably biologically connected with the fact that 
hunting could be more efficient if it was co-operative, and 
from a very early time the cohesion of the tribe must have 
been increased and developed by conflicts with other 
tribes. 

The remains that have been discovered of early men and 
half-men are now sufficiently numerous to give a fairly 
clear picture of the stages in evolution, from the most 
advanced anthropoid apes to the most primitive human 
beings. The earliest indubitably human remains that have 
been discovered so far are estimated to belong to a period 
about one million years ago, but for several million years 
before that time there seem to have been anthropoids that 
lived on the ground and not in trees. The most distinctive 
feature by which the evolutionary status of these early 
ancestors is fixed is the size of the brain, which increased 
fairly rapidly until it reached about its present capacity, but 



1 4 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


has now been virtually stationary for hundreds of 
thousands of years. During these hundreds of thousands of 
years Man has improved in knowledge, in acquired skill, 
and in social organisation, but not, so far as can be 
judged, in congenital intellectual capacity. That purely 
biological advance, so far as it can be estimated from 
bones, was completed a long time ago. It is to be supposed 
accordingly that our congenital mental equipment, as 
opposed to what we learn, is not so very different from 
that of Paleolithic Man. We have still, it would seem, the 
instincts which led men, before their behaviour had 
become deliberate, to live in small tribes, with a sharp 
antithesis of internal friendship and external hostility. The 
changes that have come since those early times have had 
to depend for their driving force partly upon this primitive 
basis of instinct, and partly upon a sometimes barely 
conscious sense of collective self-interest. One of the 
things that cause stress and strain in human social life is 
that it is possible, up to a point, to become aware of 
rational grounds for a behaviour not prompted by natural 
instinct. But when such behaviour strains natural instinct 
too severely nature takes her revenge by producing either 
listlessness or destructiveness, either of which may cause a 
structure inspired by reason to break down. 

Social cohesion, which started with loyalty to a group 
reinforced by the fear of enemies, grew by processes partly 
natural and partly deliberate until it reached the vast 
conglomerations that we now know as nations. To these 
processes various forces contributed. At a very early stage 
loyalty to a group must have been reinforced by loyalty to a 
leader. In a large tribe the chief or king may be known to 
everybody even when private individuals are often 
strangers to each other. In this way, personal as opposed 
to tribal loyalty makes possible an increase in the size of 
the group without doing violence to instinct. 

At a certain stage a further development took place. 
Wars, which originally were wars of extermination, 
gradually became— at least in part— wars of conquest; the 
vanquished, instead of being put to death, were made 
slaves and compelled to labour for their conquerors. When 
this happened there came to be two sorts of people within 



SOCIAL COHESION AND HUMAN NATURE 1 5 


a community, namely, the original members who alone 
were free, and were the repositories of the tribal spirit, and 
the subjects who obeyed from fear, not from instinctive 
loyalty. Nineveh and Babylon ruled over vast territories, not 
because their subjects had any instinctive sense of social 
cohesion with the dominant city, but solely because of the 
terror inspired by its prowess in war. From those early days 
down to modern times war has been the chief engine in 
enlarging the size of communities, and fear has 
increasingly replaced tribal solidarity as a source of social 
cohesion. This change was not confined to large 
communities; it occurred, for example, in Sparta, where the 
free citizens were a small minority, while the Helots were 
unmercifully suppressed. Sparta was praised throughout 
antiquity for its admirable social cohesion, but it was a 
cohesion which never attempted to embrace the whole 
population, except in so far as terror compelled outward 
loyalty. 

At a later stage in the development of civilisation, a new 
kind of loyalty began to be developed; a loyalty based not 
on territorial affinity or similarity of race, but on identity of 
creed. So far as the West is concerned this seems to have 
originated with the Orphic communities, which admitted 
slaves on equal terms. Apart from them religion in 
antiquity was so closely associated with government that 
groups of co-religionists were broadly identical with the 
groups that had grown up on the old biological basis. But 
identity of creed has gradually become a stronger and 
stronger force. Its military strength was first displayed by 
Islam in the conquests of the seventh and eighth centuries. 
It supplied the moving force in the Crusades and in the 
wars of religion. In the sixteenth century theological 
loyalties very often outweighed those of nationality: English 
Catholics often sided with Spain, French Huguenots with 
England. In our own day two widespread creeds embrace 
the loyalty of a very large part of mankind. One of these, 
the creed of Communism, has the advantage of intense 
fanaticism and embodiment in a Sacred Book. The other, 
less definite, is nevertheless potent— it may be called ‘The 
American Way of Life’. America, formed by immigration 
from many different countries, has no biological unity, but 



1 6 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


it has a unity quite as strong as that of European nations. 
As Abraham Lincoln said, it is ‘dedicated to a proposition.’ 
Immigrants into America often suffer from nostalgia for 
Europe, but their children, for the most part, consider the 
American way of life preferable to that of the Old World, 
and believe firmly that it would be for the good of mankind 
if this way of life became universal. Both in America and in 
Russia unity of creed and national unity have coalesced, 
and have thereby acquired a new strength, but these rival 
creeds have an attraction which transcends their national 
boundaries. 

Modern loyalty to the vast groups of our time, in so far 
as it is strong and subjectively satisfying, makes use still of 
the old psychological mechanism evolved in the days of 
small tribes. Congenital human nature, as opposed to what 
is made of it by schools and religions, by propaganda and 
economic organisations, has not changed much since the 
time when men first began to have brains of the size to 
which we are accustomed. Instinctively we divide mankind 
into friends and foes— friends, towards whom we have the 
morality of co-operation; foes, towards whom we have that 
of competition. But this division is constantly changing; at 
one moment a man hates his business competitor, at 
another, when both are threatened by Socialism or by an 
external enemy, he suddenly begins to view him as a 
brother. Always when we pass beyond the limits of the 
family it is the external enemy which supplies the cohesive 
force. In times of safety we can afford to hate our 
neighbour, but in times of danger we must love him. 
People do not, at most times, love those whom they find 
sitting next to them in a bus, but during the blitz they did. 

It is this that makes the difficulty of devising means of 
worldwide unity. A world state, if it were firmly established, 
would have no enemies to fear, and would therefore be in 
danger of breaking down through lack of cohesive force. 
Two great religions— Buddhism and Christianity— have 
sought to extend to the whole human race the co-operative 
feeling that is spontaneous towards fellow tribesmen. They 
have preached the brotherhood of Man, showing by the use 
of the word ‘brotherhood’ that they are attempting to 
extend beyond its natural bounds an emotional attitude 



SOCIAL COHESION AND HUMAN NATURE 1 7 


which, in its origin, is biological. If we are all children of 
God, then we are all one family. But in practice those who 
in theory adopted this creed have always felt that those 
who did not adopt it were not children of God but children 
of Satan, and the old mechanism of hatred of those outside 
the tribe has returned, giving added vigour to the creed, 
but in a direction which diverted it from its original 
purpose. Religion, morality, economic self-interest, the 
mere pursuit of biological survival, all supply to our 
intelligence unanswerable arguments in favour of world- 
wide co-operation, but the old instincts that have come 
down to us from our tribal ancestors rise up in indignation, 
feeling that life would lose its savour if there were no one 
to hate, that anyone who could have loved such a 
scoundrel as so-and-so would be a worm, that struggle is 
the law of life, and that in a world where we all loved one 
another there would be nothing to live for. If the unification 
of mankind is ever to be realised, it will be necessary to 
find ways of circumventing our largely unconscious 
primitive ferocity, partly by establishing a reign of law, and 
partly by finding innocent outlets for our competitive 
instincts. 

This is not an easy problem, and it is one which cannot 
be solved by morality alone. Psycho-analysis, though no 
doubt it has its exaggerations, and even perhaps 
absurdities, has taught us a great deal that is true and 
valuable. It is an old saying that even if you expel nature 
with a pitchfork it will still come back, but psycho-analysis 
has supplied the commentary to this text. We now know 
that a life which goes excessively against natural impulse is 
one which is likely to involve effects of strain that may be 
quite as bad as indulgence in forbidden impulses would 
have been. People who live a life which is unnatural beyond 
a point are likely to be filled with envy, malice and all 
uncharitableness. They may develop strains of cruelty, or, 
on the other hand, they may so completely lose all joy in 
life that they have no longer any capacity for effort. This 
latter result has been observed among savages brought 
suddenly in contact with modern civilisation. 
Anthropologists have described how Papuan head hunters, 
deprived by white authority of their habitual sport, lose all 



1 8 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


zest, and are no longer able to be interested in anything. I 
do not wish to infer that they should have been allowed to 
go on hunting heads, but I do mean that it would have 
been worth while if psychologists had taken some trouble 
to find some innocent substitute activity. Civilised Man 
everywhere is, to some degree, in the position of the 
Papuan victims of virtue. We have all kinds of aggressive 
impulses, and also creative impulses, which society forbids 
us to indulge, and the alternatives that it supplies in the 
shape of football matches and all-in wrestling are hardly 
adequate. Anyone who hopes that in time it may be 
possible to abolish war should give serious thought to the 
problem of satisfying harmlessly the instincts that we 
inherit from long generations of savages. For my part I find 
a sufficient outlet in detective stories, where I alternatively 
identify myself with the murderer and the huntsman- 
detective, but I know there are those to whom this 
vicarious outlet is too mild, and for them something 
stronger should be provided. 

I do not think that ordinary human beings can be happy 
without competition, for competition has been, ever since 
the origin of Man, the spur to most serious activities. We 
should not, therefore, attempt to abolish competition, but 
only see to it that it takes forms which are not too 
injurious. Primitive competition was a conflict as to which 
should murder the other man and his wife and children; 
modern competition in the shape of war still takes this 
form. But in sport, in literary and artistic rivalry, and in 
constitutional politics it takes forms which do very little 
harm and yet offer a fairly adequate outlet for our 
combative instincts. What is wrong in this respect is not 
that such forms of competition are bad, but that they form 
too small a part of the lives of ordinary men and women. 

Apart from war, modern civilisation has aimed 
increasingly at security, but I am not at all sure that the 
elimination of all danger makes for happiness. I should like 
at this point to quote a passage from Sir Arthur Keith’s New 
Theory of Human Evolution : 

Those who have visited the peoples living under a reign 
of “wild justice” bring back accounts of happiness among 
natives living under such conditions. Freya Stark, for 



SOCIAL COHESION AND HUMAN NATURE 1 9 


example, reported thus of South Arabia: “When I came to 
travel in that part of the country where security is non- 
existent, I found a people, though full of lament over their 
life of perpetual blackmail and robbery, yet just as cheerful 
and as full of the ordinary joy of living as anywhere on 
earth.” Dr H.K.Fry had a similar experience among the 
aborigines of Australia. “A native in his wild state,” he 
reports, “lives in constant danger, hostile spirits are about 
him constantly. Yet he is light-hearted and cheerful... 
indulgent to his children and kind to his aged parents." My 
third illustration is taken from the Crow Indians of 
America, who have been living under the eye of Dr R.Lowrie 
for many years. They are now living in the security of a 
reserve. “Ask a Crow," reports Dr Lowrie, “whether he would 
have security as now, or danger as of old, and his answer is 
—‘danger as of old. ..there was glory in it.’” I am assuming 
that the wild conditions of life I have been describing were 
those amid which mankind lived through the whole of the 
primal period of its evolution. It was amid such conditions 
that man’s nature and character were fashioned, one of the 
conditions being the practice of blood-revenge’ 

Such effects of human psychology account for some 
things which, for me at least, were surprising when in 1914 
I first became aware of them. Many people are happier 
during a war than they are in peace time, provided the 
direct suffering entailed by the fighting does not fall too 
heavily upon them personally. A quiet life may well be a 
boring life. The unadventurous existence of a well-behaved 
citizen, engaged in earning a moderate living in a humble 
capacity, leaves completely unsatisfied all that part of his 
nature which, if he had lived 400,000 years ago, would 
have found ample scope in the search for food, in cutting off 
the heads of enemies, and in escaping the attention of 
tigers. When war comes the bank clerk may escape and 
become a commando, and then at last he feels that he is 
living as nature intended him to live. But, unfortunately, 
science has put into our hands such enormously powerful 
means of satisfying our destructive instincts, that to allow 
them free play no longer serves any evolutionary purpose, 
as it did while men were divided into petty tribes. The 
problem of making peace with our anarchic impulses is one 



20 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


which has been too little studied, but one which becomes 
more and more imperative as scientific technique 
advances. From the purely biological point of view it is 
unfortunate that the destructive side of technique has 
advanced so very much more rapidly than the creative side. 
In one moment a man may kill 500,000 people, but he 
cannot have children any quicker than in the days of our 
savage ancestors. If a man could have 500,000 children as 
quickly as by an atomic bomb he can destroy 500,000 
enemies, we might, at the cost of enormous suffering, 
leave the biological problem to the struggle for existence 
and the survival of the fittest. But in the modern world the 
old mechanism of evolution can no longer be relied upon. 

The problem of the social reformer, therefore, is not 
merely to seek means of security, for if these means when 
found provide no deep satisfaction the security will be 
thrown away for the glory of adventure. The problem is 
rather to combine that degree of security which is essential 
to the species, with forms of adventure and danger and 
contest which are compatible with the civilised way of life. 
And in attempting to solve this problem we must 
remember always that, although our manner of life and our 
institutions and our knowledge have undergone profound 
changes, our instincts both for good and evil remain very 
much what they were when our ancestors’ brains first grew 
to their present size. I do not think the reconciliation of 
primitive impulses with the civilised way of life is 
impossible, and the studies of anthropologists have shown 
the very wide adaptability of human nature to different 
culture patterns. But I do not think it can be achieved by 
complete exclusion of any basic impulse. A life without 
adventure is likely to be unsatisfying, but a life in which 
adventure is allowed to take whatever form it will is sure to 
be short. 

I think perhaps the essence of the matter was given by 
the Red Indian whom I quoted a moment ago, who 
regretted the old life because ‘there was glory in it.’ Every 
energetic person wants something that can count as 
‘glory.’ There are those who get it— film stars, famous 
athletes, military commanders, and even some few 
politicians, but they are a small minority, and the rest are 



SOCIAL COHESION AND HUMAN NATURE 21 


left to day-dreams— day-dreams of the cinema, day- 
dreams of wild west adventure stories, purely private day- 
dreams of imaginary power. I am not one of those who 
think day-dreams wholly evil; they are an essential part of 
the life of imagination. But when throughout a long life 
there is no means of relating them to reality they easily 
become unwholsesome and even dangerous to sanity. 
Perhaps it may still be possible, even in our mechanical 
world, to find some real outlet for the impulses which are 
now confined to the realm of phantasy. In the interests of 
stability it is much to be hoped that this may be possible, 
for, if it is not, destructive philosophies will from time to 
time sweep away the best of human achievements. If this is 
to be prevented, the savage in each one of us must find 
some outlet not incompatible with civilised life and the 
happiness of his equally savage neighbour. 



22 



Lecture 2 

Social Cohesion and Government 


The original mechanism of social cohesion, as it is still to be 
found among the most primitive races, was one which 
operated through individual psychology without the need 
of anything that could be called government. There were, 
no doubt, tribal customs which all had to obey, but one 
must suppose that there was no impulse to disobedience 
of these customs and no need of magistrates or policemen 
to enforce them. In Old Stone Age times, so far as authority 
was concerned, the tribe seems to have lived in a state 
which we should now describe as anarchy. But it differed 
from what anarchy would be in a modern community owing 
to the fact that social impulses sufficiently controlled the 
acts of individuals. Men of the New Stone Age were already 
quite different; they had government, authorities capable 
of exacting obedience, and large-scale enforced co- 
operation. This is evident from their works; the primitive 
type of small-tribe cohesion could not have produced 
Stonehenge, still less the Pyramids. The enlargement of the 
social unit must have been mainly the result of war. If two 
tribes had a war of extermination, the victorious tribe by the 
acquisiton of new territory would be able to increase its 
numbers. There would also in war be an obvious advantage 
in an alliance of two or more tribes. If the danger 
producing the alliance persisted, the alliance would, in 
time, become an amalgamation. When a unit became too 
large for all its members to know each other, there would 
come to be a need of some mechanism for arriving at 
collective decisions, and this mechanism would inevitably 
develop by stages into something that a modern man could 
recognise as government. As soon as there is government 



24 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


some men have more power than others, and the power 
that they have depends, broadly speaking, upon the size of 
the unit that they govern. Love of power, therefore, will 
cause the governors to desire conquest. This motive is very 
much reinforced when the vanquished are made into slaves 
instead of being exterminated. In this way, at a very early 
age, communities arose in which, although primitive 
impulses towards social co-operation still existed, they 
were immensely reinforced by the power of the 
government to punish those who disobeyed it. In the 
earliest fully historical community, that of ancient Egypt, 
we find a king whose powers over a large territory were 
absolute, except for some limitation by the priesthood, and 
we find a large servile population whom the king could at his 
will, employ upon State enterprises such as the Pyramids. 
In such a community only a minority at the top of the 
social scale— the king, the aristocracy, and the priests— 
needed any psychological mechanism towards social 
cohesion; all the rest merely obeyed. No doubt large parts 
of the population were unhappy; one can get a picture of 
their condition from the first chapters of Exodus. But as a 
rule, so long as external enemies were not to be feared, 
this condition of widespread suffering did not prevent the 
prosperity of the State, and it left unimpaired the enjoyment 
of life by the holders of power. This state of affairs must 
have existed for long ages throughout what we now call the 
Middle East. It depended for its stability upon religion and 
the divinity of the king. Disobedience was impiety, and 
rebellion was liable to call down the anger of the gods. So 
long as the upper social layers genuinely believed this, the 
rest would be merely disciplined as we now discipline 
domestic animals. 

It is a curious fact that military conquest very often 
produced in the conquered a genuine loyalty towards 
their masters. This happened in time with most of the 
Roman conquests. In the fifth century, when Rome could no 
longer compel obedience, Gaul remained completely loyal 
to the Empire. All the states of antiquity owed their 
existence to military power, but most of them were able, if 
they lasted long enough, to generate a sense of cohesion in 
the whole in spite of the violent resistance of many parts at 



SOCIAL COHESION AND GOVERNMENT 25 


the time of their incorporation. The same thing happened 
again with the growth of modern States during the Middle 
Ages. England, France, and Spain all acquired unity as a 
result of military victory by a ruler of some part of what 
became a single nation. 

In antiquity all large States, except Egypt, suffered from a 
lack of stability of which the causes were largely technical. 
When nothing could move faster than a horse it was 
difficult for the central government to keep a firm hold 
upon outlying satraps or pro-consuls, who were apt to 
rebel, sometimes suc-ceeding in conquering the whole 
Empire and at other times making themselves independent 
sovereigns of a part of it. Alexander, Atilla, and Jenghiz 
Khan had vast empires which broke up at their death, and 
in which unity had depended entirely upon the prestige of a 
great conqueror. These various empires had no 
psychological unity, but only the unity of force. Rome did 
better, because Graeco-Roman civilisation was something 
which educated individuals valued and which was sharply 
contrasted with the barbarism of tribes beyond the 
frontier. Until the invention of modern techniques it was 
scarcely possible to hold a large empire together unless the 
upper sections of society throughout its length and breadth 
had some common sentiment by which they were united. 
And the ways of generating such a common sentiment were 
much less understood than they are now. The psychological 
basis of social cohesion, therefore, was still important, 
although needed only among a governing minority. In 
ancient communities the chief advantage of great size, 
namely the possibility of large armies, was balanced by the 
disadvantage that it took a long time to move an army from 
one part of the empire to another, and also that the civil 
government had not discovered ways of preventing military 
insurrection. To some degree these conditions lasted on 
into modern times. It was largely lack of mobility that 
caused England, Spain and Portugal to lose their 
possessions in the Western Hemisphere. But since the 
coming of steam and the telegraph it has become much 
easier than it was before to hold a large territory, and since 
the coming of universal education it has become easier to 



26 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


instill more or less artificial loyalty throughout a large 
population. 

Modern technique has not only facilitated the psychology 
of cohesion in large groups; it has also made large groups 
imperative both from an economic and from a military point 
of view. The advantages of mass production are a trite 
theme, upon which I do not propose to enlarge. As 
everybody knows, they have been urged as a reason for 
closer unity among the nations of Western Europe. The Nile 
from the earliest times has promoted the cohesion of the 
whole of Egypt, since a government controlling only the 
upper Nile could destroy the fertility of lower Egypt. Here 
no advanced technique was involved, but the Tennessee 
Valley Authority and the proposed St Lawrence Water Way 
are scientific extensions of the same cohesive effect of 
rivers. Central power stations, distributing electricity over 
wide areas, have become increasingly important, and are 
much more profitable when the area is large than when it is 
small. If it becomes practicable (as is not unlikely) to use 
atomic power on a large scale, this will enormously 
augment the profitable area of distribution. All of these 
modern developments increase the control over the lives of 
individuals possessed by those who govern large 
organisations, and at the same time make a few large 
organisations much more productive than a number of 
smaller ones. Short of the whole planet there is no visible 
limit to the advantages of size, both in economic and in 
political organisations. 

I come now to another survey of roughly the same 
governmental developments from a different point of view. 
Governmental control over the lives of members of the 
community has differed throughout history, not only in the 
size of the governmental area, but in the intensity of its 
interference with individual life. What may be called 
civilisation begins with empires of a well-defined type, of 
which Egypt, Babylon, and Nineveh are the most notable; 
the Aztec and Inca empires were essentially of the same 
type. In such empires the upper caste had at first a 
considerable measure of personal initiative, but the large 
slave population acquired in foreign conquest had none. 
The priesthood were able to interfere in daily life to a very 



SOCIAL COHESION AND GOVERNMENT 27 


great degree. Except where religion was involved, the King 
had absolute power, and could compel his subjects to fight 
in his wars. The divinity of the King and the reverence for 
the priesthood produced a stable society— in the case of 
Egypt, the most stable of which we have any knowledge. 
This stability was bought at the expense of rigidity. And 
these ancient empires became stereotyped to a point at 
which they could no longer resist foreign aggression; they 
were absorbed by Persia, and Persia in the end was 
defeated by the Creeks. 

The Creeks perfected a new type of civilisation that had 
been inaugurated by the Phoenicians: that of the City State 
based on commerce and sea power. Greek cities differed 
greatly as regards the degree of individual liberty permitted 
to citizens; in most of them there was a great deal, but in 
Sparta an absolute minimum. Most of them tended, 
however, to fall under the sway of tyrants, and throughout 
considerable periods had a regime of despotism tempered 
by revolution. In a City State revolution was easy. 
Malcontents had only to traverse a few miles to get beyond 
the territory of the government against which they wished 
to rebel, and there were always hostile City States ready to 
help them. Throughout the great age of Greece there was a 
degree of anarchy which to a modern mind would seem 
intolerable. But the citizens of a Greek city, even those who 
were in rebellion against the actual government, had 
retained a psychology of primitive loyalty; they loved their 
own city with a devotion which was often unwise but 
almost always passionate. The greatness of the Greeks in 
individual achievement was, I think, intimately bound up 
with their political incompetence, for the strength of 
individual passion was the source both of individual 
achievement and of the failure to secure Greek unity. And 
so Greece fell under the domination, first of Macedonia, 
and then of Rome. 

The Roman Empire, while it was expanding, left a very 
considerable degree of individual and local autonomy in 
the Provinces, but after Augustus government gradually 
acquired a greater and greater degree of control, and in the 
end, chiefly through the severity of taxation, caused the 
whole system to break down over the greater part of what 



28 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


had been the Roman Empire. In what remained, however, 
there was no relaxation of control. It was objection to this 
minute control, more than any other cause, that made 
Justinian’s re-conquest of Italy and Africa so transitory. For 
those who had first welcomed his legions as deliverers from 
the Goths and Vandals changed their minds when the 
legions were followed by an army of tax gatherers. 

Rome’s attempt to unify the civilised world came to grief 
largely because, perhaps through being both remote and 
alien, it failed to bring any measure of instinctive 
happiness even to prosperous citizens. In its last centuries 
there was universal pessimism and lack of vigour. Men felt 
that life here on earth had little to offer, and this feeling 
helped Christianity to centre men’s thoughts on the world 
to come. 

With the eclipse of Rome the West underwent a very 
complete transformation. Commerce almost ceased, the 
great Roman roads fell into disrepair, petty kings 
constantly went to war with each other, and governed 
small territories as best they could, while they had to meet 
the anarchy of a turbulent Teutonic aristocracy and the 
sullen dislike of the old Romanised population. Slavery on a 
large scale almost disappeared throughout Western 
Christendom, but was replaced by serfdom. In place of 
being supported by the vast fleets that brought grain from 
Africa to Rome, small communities with few and rare 
external contacts lived as best they could on the produce 
of their own land. Life was hard and rough, but it had no 
longer the quality of listlessness and hopelessness that it 
had had in the last days of Rome. Throughout the Dark 
Ages and Middle Ages lawlessness was rampant, with the 
result that all thoughtful men worshipped law. Gradually 
the vigour which lawlessness had permitted restored a 
measure of order and enabled a series of great men to 
build up a new civilisation. 

From the fifteenth century to the present time the power 
of the State as against the individual has been continually 
increasing, at first mainly as a result of the invention of 
gunpowder. Just as, in the earlier days of anarchy, the most 
thoughtful men worshipped law, so during the period of 
increasing State power there was a growing tendency to 



SOCIAL COHESION AND GOVERNMENT 29 


worship liberty. The eighteenth and nineteenth centuries 
had a remarkable degree of success in increasing State 
power to what was necessary for the preservation of order, 
and leaving inspite of it a great measure of freedom to 
those citizens who did not belong to the lowest social 
grades. The impulse towards liberty, however, seems now 
to have lost much of its force among reformers; it has been 
replaced by the love of equality, which has been largely 
stimulated by the rise to affluence and power of new 
industrial magnates without any traditional claim to 
superiority. And the exigencies of total war have persuaded 
almost everybody that a much tighter social system is 
necessary than that which contented our grandfathers. 

There is over a large part of the earth’s surface 
something not unlike a reversion to the ancient Egyptian 
system of divine kingship, controlled by a new priestly 
caste. Although this tendency has not gone so far in the 
West as it has in the East, it has, nevertheless, gone to 
lengths which would have astonished the eighteenth and 
nineteenth centuries both in England and in America. 
Individual initiative is hemmed in either by the State or by 
powerful corporations, and there is a great danger lest this 
should produce, as in ancient Rome, a kind of listlessness 
and fatalism that is disastrous to vigorous life. I am 
constantly receiving letters saying: ‘I see that the world is 
in a bad state, but what can one humble person do? Life 
and property are at the mercy of a few individuals who have 
the decision as to peace or war. Economic activities on any 
large scale are determined by those who govern either the 
State or the large corporations. Even where there is 
nominally democracy, the part which one citizen can obtain 
in controlling policy is usually infinitesimal. Is it not perhaps 
better in such circumstances to forget public affairs and 
get as much enjoyment by the way as the times permit?’ I 
find such letters very difficult to answer, and I am sure that 
the state of mind which leads to their being written is very 
inimical to a healthy social life. As a result of mere size, 
government becomes increasingly remote from the 
governed and tends, even in a democracy, to have an 
independent life of its own. I do not profess to know how 
to cure this evil completely, but I think it is important to 



30 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


recognise its existence and to search for ways of 
diminishing its magnitude. 

The instinctive mechanism of social cohesion, namely 
loyalty to a small tribe whose members are all known to 
each other, is something very remote indeed from the kind 
of loyalty to a large State which has replaced it in the 
modern world, and even what remains of the more 
primitive kind of loyalty is likely to disappear in the new 
organisation of the world that present dangers call for. An 
Englishman or a Scotsman can feel an instinctive loyalty to 
Britain: he may know what Shakespeare has to say about it; 
he knows that it is an island with boundaries that are 
wholly natural; he is aware of English history, in so far, at 
least, as it is glorious, and he knows that people on the 
Continent speak foreign languages. But if loyalty to Britain 
is to be replaced by loyalty to Western Union, there will 
need to be a consciousness of Western culture as 
something with a unity transcending national boundaries; 
for apart from this there is only one pyschological motive 
which is adequate for the purpose, and that is the motive 
of fear of external enemies. But fear is a negative motive, 
and one which ceases to be operative in the moment of 
victory. When it is compared with the love of a Greek for 
his native city it is obvious how very much smaller is the 
hold which loyalty based merely on fear has on the 
instincts and passions of ordinary men and women in the 
absence of immediate and pressing dangers. 

Government, from the earliest times at which it existed, 
has had two functions, one negative and one positive. Its 
negative function has been to prevent private violence, to 
protect life and property, to enact criminal law and secure 
its enforcement. But in addition to this it has had a positive 
purpose, namely, to facilitate the realisation of desires 
deemed to be common to the great majority of citizens. 
The positive functions of government at most times have 
been mainly confined to war: if an enemy could be 
conquered and his territory acquired, everybody in the 
victorious nation profited in a greater or less degree. But 
now the positive functions of government are enormously 
enlarged. There is first of all education, consisting not only 
of the acquisition of scholastic attainments, but also of the 



SOCIAL COHESION AND GOVERNMENT 31 


instilling of certain loyalties and certain beliefs. These are 
those which the State considers desirable, and, in a lesser 
degree, in some cases, those demanded by some religious 
body. Then there are vast industrial enterprises. Even in the 
United States, which attempts to limit the economic 
activities of the State to the utmost possible degree, 
governmental control over such enterprises is rapidly 
increasing. And as regards industrial enterprises there is 
little difference, from the psychological point of view, 
between those conducted by the State and those conducted 
by large private corporations. In either case there is a 
government which in fact, if not in intention, is remote from 
those whom it controls. It is only the members of the 
government, whether of a State or of a large corporation, 
who can retain the sense of individual initiative, and there 
is inevitably a tendency for governments to regard those 
who work for them more or less as they regard their 
machines, that is to say, merely as necessary means. The 
desirability of smooth co-operation constantly tends to 
increase the size of units, and therefore to diminish the 
number of those who still possess the power of initiative. 
Worst of all, from our present point of view, is a system 
which exists over wide fields in Britain, where those who 
have nominal initiative are pereptually controlled by a Civil 
Service which has only a veto and no duty of inauguration, 
and thus acquires a negative psychology perpetually prone 
to prohibitions. Under such a system the energetic are 
reduced to despair; those who might have become 
energetic in a more hopeful environment tend to be listless 
and frivolous; and it is not likely that the positive functions 
of the State will be performed with vigour and competence. 
It is probable that economic entomology could bring in 
enormously greater profits than it does at present, but this 
would require the sanctioning of the salaries of a 
considerable number of entomologists, and at present the 
government is of the opinion that a policy so enterprising 
as employing entomologists should only be applied with 
timidity. This, needless to say, is the opinion of men who 
have acquired the habit that one sees in unwise parents of 
always saying ‘don’t do that,’ without stopping to consider 
whether ‘that’ does any harm. Such evils are very hard to 



32 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


avoid where there is remote control, and there is likely to 
be much remote control in any organisation which is very 
large. 

I shall consider in a later lecture what can be done to 
mitigate these evils without losing the indubitable 
advantages of large scale organisation. It may be that the 
present tendencies towards centralisation are too strong to 
be resisted until they have led to disaster, and that, as 
happened in the fifth century, the whole system must break 
down, with all the inevitable results of anarchy and 
poverty, before human beings can again acquire that 
degree of personal freedom without which life loses its 
savour. I hope that this is not the case, but it certainly will 
be the case unless the danger is realised and unless 
vigorous measures are taken to combat it. 

In this brief sketch of the changes in regard to social 
cohesion that have occurred in historical times, we may 
observe a two-fold movement. 

On the one hand, there is a periodic development, from a 
loose and primitive type of organisation to a gradually 
more orderly government, embracing a wider area, and 
regulating a greater part of the lives of individuals. At a 
certain point in this development, when there has recently 
been a great increase in wealth and security, but the vigour 
and enterprise of wilder ages has not yet decayed, there 
are apt to be great achievements in the way of advancing 
civilisation. But when the new civilisation becomes 
stereotyped, when government has had time to consolidate 
its power, when custom, tradition, and law have established 
rules sufficiently minute to choke enterprise, the society 
concerned enters upon a stagnant phase. Men praise the 
exploits of their ancestors, but can no longer equal them; 
art becomes conventional, and science is stifled by respect 
for authority. 

This type of development f ollowed by ossification is to be 
found in China and India, in Mesopotamia and Egypt, and 
in the Graeco-Roman world. The end comes usually 
through foreign conquest: there are old maxims for 
fighting old enemies, but when an enemy of a new type 
arises the elderly community has not the adaptability to 
adopt the new maxims that can alone bring safety. If, as 



SOCIAL COHESION AND GOVERNMENT 33 


often happens, the conquerors are less civilised than the 
conquered, they have probably not the skill for the 
government of a large empire, or for the preservation of 
commerce over a wide area. The result is a diminution of 
population, of the size of governmental units, and of the 
intensity of governmental control. Gradually, in the new 
more or less anarchic conditions, vigour returns, and a new 
cycle begins. 

But in addition to this periodic movement there is 
another. At the apex of each cycle, the area governed by 
one State is larger than at any former time, and the degree 
of control exercised by authority over the individual is 
more intense than in any previous culmination. The Roman 
Empire was larger than the Babylonian and Egyptian 
empires, and the empires of the present day are larger than 
that of Rome. There has never in past history been any large 
State that controlled its citizens as completely as they are 
controlled in the Soviet Republic, or even in the countries 
of Western Europe. 

Since the earth is of finite size, this tendency, if 
unchecked, must end in the creation of a single world State. 
But as there will then be no external enemy to promote 
cohesion through fear, the old psychological mechanisms 
will no longer be adequate. There will be no scope for 
patriotism in the affairs of the world government; the 
driving force will have to be found in self-interest and 
benevolence, without the potent incentives of hate and 
fear. Can such a society persist? And if it persists, can it be 
capable of progress? These are difficult questions. Some 
considerations that must be borne in mind if they are to be 
answered will be brought forward in subsequent lectures. 

I have spoken of a two-fold movement in past history, 
but I do not consider that there is anything either certain or 
inevitable about such laws of historical development as we 
can discover. New knowledge may make the course of 
events completely different from what it would otherwise 
have been; this was, for instance, a result of the discovery 
of America. New institutions also may have effects that 
could not have been foreseen; I do not see how any Roman 
at the time of Julius Caesar could have predicted anything 
at all like the Catholic Church. And no one in the 



34 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


nineteenth century, not even Marx, foresaw the Soviet 
Union. For such reasons, all prophecies as to the future of 
mankind should be treated only as hypotheses which may 
deserve consideration. 

I think that, while all definite prophecy is rash, there are 
certain undesirable possibilities which it is wise to bear in 
mind. On the one hand, prolonged and destructive war may 
cause a breakdown of industry in all civilised States, 
leading to a condition of small-scale anarchy such as 
prevailed in Western Europe after the fall of Rome. This 
would involve an immense diminution of the population, 
and, for a time at least, a cessation of many of the activities 
that we consider characteristic of a civilised way of life. But 
it would seem reasonable to hope that, as happened in the 
middle ages, a sufficient minimum of social cohesion would 
in time be restored, and the lost ground would gradually be 
recovered. 

There is, however, another danger, perhaps more likely 
to be realised. Modern techniques have made possible a 
new intensity of governmental control, and this possibility 
has been exploited very fully in totalitarian States. It may 
be that under the stress of war, or the fear of war, or as a 
result of totalitarian conquest, the parts of the world where 
some degree of individual liberty survives may grow fewer, 
and even in them liberty may come to be more and more 
restricted. There is not much reason to suppose that the 
resulting system would be unstable, but it would almost 
certainly be static and unprogressive. And it would bring 
with it a recrudescence of ancient evils: slavery, bigotry, 
intolerance, and abject misery for the majority of mankind. 
This is, to my mind, a misfortune against which it is of the 
utmost importance to be on our guard. For this reason, 
emphasis upon the value of the individual is even more 
necessary now than at any former time. 

There is another fallacy which it is important to avoid. I 
think it is true, as I have been arguing, that what is 
congenital in human nature has probably changed little 
during hundreds of thousands of years, but what is 
congenital is only a small part of the mental structure of a 
modern human being. From what I have been saying I 
should not wish anyone to draw the inference that in a 



SOCIAL COHESION AND GOVERNMENT 35 


world without war there would necessarily be a sense of 
instinctive frustration. Sweden has never been at war since 
1814, that is to say, for a period of four generations, but I 
do not think anybody could maintain that the Swedes have 
suffered in their instinctive life as a result of this immunity. 
If mankind succeeds in abolishing war, it should not be 
difficult to find other outlets for the love of adventure and 
risk. The old outlets, which at one time served a biological 
purpose, do so no longer, and therefore new outlets are 
necessary. But there is nothing in human nature that 
compels us to acquiesce in continued savagery. Our less 
orderly impulses are dangerous only when they are denied 
or misunderstood. When this mistake is avoided, the 
problem of fitting them into a good social system can be 
solved by the help of intelligence and goodwill. 



36 



Lecture 3 

The Role of Individuality 


In this lecture I propose to consider the importance, both 
for good and evil, of impulses and desires that belong to 
some members of a community but not to all. In a very 
primitive community such impulses and desires play very 
little part. Hunting and war are activities in which one man 
may be more successful than another, but in which all 
share a common purpose. So long as a man’s spontaneous 
activities are such as all the tribe approves of and shares in, 
his initiative is very little curbed by others within the tribe, 
and even his most spontaneous actions conform to the 
recognised pattern of behaviour. But as men grow more 
civilised there comes to be an increasing difference 
between one man’s activities and another’s, and a 
community needs, if it is to prosper, a certain number of 
individuals who do not wholly conform to the general type. 
Practically all progress, artistic, moral, and intellectual, has 
depended upon such individuals, who have been a decisive 
factor in the transition from barbarism to civilisation. If a 
community is to make progress, it needs exceptional 
individuals whose activities, though useful, are not of a 
sort that ought to be general. There is always a tendency in 
highly organised society for the activities of such 
individuals to be unduly hampered, but on the other hand, 
if the community exercises no control, the same kind of 
individual initiative which may produce a valuable 
innovator may also produce a criminal. The problem, like 
all those with which we are concerned, is one of balance; 
too little liberty brings stagnation, and too much brings 
chaos. 



38 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


There are many ways in which an individual may 
differ from most of the other members of his herd. He may 
be exceptionally anarchic or criminal; he may have rare 
artistic talent; he may have what comes in time to be 
recognised as a new wisdom in matters of religion and 
morals, and he may have exceptional intellectual powers. It 
would seem that from a very early period in human history 
there must have been some differentiation of function. The 
pictures in the caves in the Pyrenees which were made by 
Paleolithic men have a very high degree of artistic merit, 
and one can hardly suppose that all the men of that time 
were capable of such admirable work. It seems far more 
probable that those who were found to have artistic talent 
were sometimes allowed to stay at home making pictures 
while the rest of the tribe hunted. The chief and the priest 
must have begun from a very early time to be chosen for 
real or supposed peculiar excellences: medicine men could 
work magic, and the tribal spirit was in some sense 
incarnate in the chief. But from the earliest time there has 
been a tendency for every activity of this kind to become 
institutionalised. The chieftain became hereditary, the 
medicine men became a separate caste, and recognised 
bards became the prototypes of our Poets Laureate. It has 
always been difficult for communities to recognise what is 
necessary for individuals who are going to make the kind 
of exceptional contribution that I have in mind, namely, 
elements of wildness, of separateness from the herd, of 
domination by rare impulses of which the utility was not 
always obvious to everybody. 

In this lecture I wish to consider both in history and in 
the present day the relation of the exceptional man to the 
community, and the conditions that make it easy for his 
unusual merits to be socially fruitful. I shall consider this 
problem first in art, then in religion and morals, and, 
finally, in science. 

The artist in our day does not play nearly so vital a part 
in public life as he has done in many former ages. There is 
a tendency in our days to despise a Court poet, and to 
think that a poet should be a solitary being proclaiming 
something that Philistines do not wish to hear. Historically 
the matter was far otherwise; Homer, Virgil, and 



THE ROLE OF INDIVIDUALITY 39 


Shakespeare were Court Poets, they sang the glories of 
their tribe and its noble traditions. (Of Shakespeare, I must 
confess, this is only partially true, but it certainly applies to 
his historical plays.) Welsh bards kept alive the glories of 
King Arthur, and these glories came to be celebrated by 
English and French writers; King Henry II encouraged them 
for imperialistic reasons. The glories of the Parthenon and 
of the medieval cathedrals were intimately bound up with 
public objects. Music, though it would play its part in 
courtship, existed primarily to promote courage in battle— 
a purpose to which, according to Plato, it ought to be 
confined by law. But of these ancient glories of the artist 
little remains in the modern world except the piper to a 
Highland regiment. We still honour the artist, but we isolate 
him; we think of art as something separate, not as an 
integral part of the life of the community. The architect 
alone, because his art serves a utilitarian purpose, retains 
something of the ancient status of the artist. 

The decay of art in our time is not only due to the fact 
that the social function of the artist is not as important as 
in former days; it is due also to the fact that spontaneous 
delight is no longer felt as something which it is important 
to be able to enjoy. Among comparatively unsophisticated 
populations folk dances and popular music still flourish, 
and something of the poet exists in very many men. But as 
men grow more industrialised and regimented, the kind of 
delight that is common in children becomes impossible to 
adults, because they are always thinking of the next thing, 
and cannot let themselves be absorbed in the moment. 
This habit of thinking of the ‘next thing’ is more fatal to 
any kind of aesthetic excellence than any other habit of 
mind that can be imagined, and if art, in any important 
sense, is to survive, it will not be by the foundation of 
solemn academies, but by recapturing the capacity for 
wholehearted joys and sorrows which prudence and 
foresight have all but destroyed. 

The men conventionally recognised as the greatest of 
mankind have been innovators in religion and morals. In 
spite of the reverence given to them by subsequent ages, 
most of them during their lifetime were in a greater or less 
degree in conflict with their own communities. Moral 



40 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


progress has consisted, in the main, of protest against 
cruel customs, and of attempts to enlarge the bounds of 
human sympathy. Human sacrifice among the Greeks died 
out at the beginning of the fully historical epoch. The 
Stoics taught that there should be sympathy not only for 
free Greeks but for barbarians and slaves, and, indeed, for 
all mankind. Buddhism and Christianity spread a similar 
doctrine far and wide. Religion, which had originally been 
part of the apparatus of tribal cohesion, promoting conflict 
without just as much as co-operation within, took on a 
more universal character, and endeavoured to transcend 
the narrow limits which primitive morality had set. It is no 
wonder if the religious innovators were execrated in their 
own day, for they sought to rob men of the joy of battle 
and the fierce delights of revenge. Primitive ferocity, which 
had seemed a virtue, was now said to be a sin, and a deep 
duality was introduced between morality and the life of 
impulse— or rather between the morality taught by those in 
whom the impulse of humanity was strong, and the 
traditional morality that was preferred by those who had no 
sympathies outside their own herd. 

Religious and moral innovators have had an immense 
effect upon human life, not always, it must be confessed, 
the effect that they intended, but nevertheless on the whole 
profoundly beneficial. It is true that in the present century 
we have seen in important parts of the world a loss of 
moral values which we had thought fairly secure, but we 
may hope that this retrogression will not last. We owe it to 
the moral innovators who first attempted to make morality 
a universal and not merely a tribal matter, that there has 
come to be a disapproval of slavery, a feeling of duty 
towards prisoners of war, a limitation of the powers of 
husbands and fathers, and a recognition, however 
imperfect, that subject races ought not to be merely 
exploited for the benefit of their conquerors. All these 
moral gains, it must be admitted, have been jeopardised by 
a recrudescence of ancient ferocity, but I do not think that 
in the end the moral advance which they have represented 
will be lost to mankind. 

The prophets and sages who inaugurated this moral 
advance, although for the most part they were not 



THE ROLE OF INDIVIDUALITY 41 


honoured in their own day, were, nevertheless, not 
prevented from doing their work. In a modern totalitarian 
State matters are worse than they were in the time of 
Socrates, or in the time of the Gospels. In a totalitarian 
State an innovator whose ideas are disliked by the 
government is not merely put to death, which is a matter to 
which a brave man may remain indifferent, but is totally 
prevented from causing his doctrine to be known. 
Innovations in such a community can come only from the 
government, and the government now, as in the past, is 
not likely to approve of anything contrary to its own 
immediate interests. In a totalitarian State such events as 
the rise of Buddhism or Christianity are scarcely possible, 
and not even by the greatest heroism can a moral reformer 
acquire an influence whatever. This is a new fact in human 
history, brought about by the much increased control over 
individuals which the modern technique of government has 
made possible. It is a very grave fact, and one which shows 
how fatal a totalitarian regime must be to every kind of 
moral progress. 

In our own day an individual of exceptional powers can 
hardly hope to have so great a career or so great a social 
influence as in former times, if he devotes himself to art or 
to religious and moral reform. There are, however, still four 
careers which are open to him; he may become a great 
political leader, like Lenin; he may acquire vast industrial 
power, like Rockefeller; he may transform the world by 
scientific discoveries, as is being done by the atomic 
physicists; or, finally, if he has not the necessary capacities 
for any of these careers, or if opportunity is lacking, his 
energy in default of other outlet may drive him into a life of 
crime. Criminals, in the legal sense, seldom have much 
influence upon the course of history, and therefore a man 
of overweening ambition will choose some other career if it 
is open to him. 

The rise of men of science to great eminence in the State 
is a modern phenomenon. Scientists, like other innovators, 
had to fight for recognition: some were banished; some 
were burnt; some were kept in dungeons; others merely 
had their books burnt. But gradually it came to be realised 
that they could put power into the hands of the State. The 



42 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


French revolutionaries, after mistakenly guillotining 
Lavoisier, employed his surviving colleagues in the 
manufacture of explosives. In modern war the scientists are 
recognised by all civilised governments as the most useful 
citizens, provided they can be tamed and induced to place 
their services at the disposal of a single government rather 
than of mankind. 

Both for good and evil almost everything that 
distinguishes our age from its predecessors is due to 
science. In daily life we have electric light, and the radio, 
and the cinema. In industry we employ machinery and 
power which we owe to science. Because of the increased 
productivity of labour we are able to devote a far greater 
proportion of our energies to wars and preparations for 
wars than was formerly possible, and we are able to keep 
the young in school very much longer than we formerly 
could. Owing to science we are able to disseminate 
information and misinformation through the Press and the 
radio to practically everybody. Owing to science we can 
make it enormously more difficult than it used to be for 
people whom the government dislikes to escape. The whole 
of our daily life and our social organisation is what it is 
because of science. The whole of this vast development is 
supported nowadays by the State, but it grew up originally 
in opposition to the State, and where, as in Russia, the 
State has reverted to an earlier pattern, the old opposition 
would again appear if the State were not omnipotent to a 
degree undreamt of by the tyrants of former ages. 

The opposition to science in the past was by no means 
surprising. Men of science affirmed things that were 
contrary to what everybody had believed; they upset 
preconceived ideas and were thought to be destitute of 
reverence. Anaxagoras taught that the sun was a red-hot 
stone and that the moon was made of earth. For this 
impiety he was banished from Athens, for was it not well 
known that the sun was a god and the moon a goddess? It 
was only the power over natural forces conferred by 
science that led bit by bit to a toleration of scientists, and 
even this was a very slow process, because their powers 
were at first attributed to magic. 



THE ROLE OF INDIVIDUALITY 43 


It would not be surprising if, in the present day, a 
powerful anti-scientific movement were to arise as a result 
of the dangers to human life that are resulting from atom 
bombs and may result from bacteriological warfare. But 
whatever people may feel about these horrors, they dare 
not turn against the men of science so long as war is at all 
probable, because if one side were equipped with scientists 
and the other not, the scientific side would almost certainly 
win. 

Science, in so far as it consists of knowledge, must be 
regarded as having value, but in so far as it consists of 
technique the question whether it is to be praised or 
blamed depends upon the use that is made of the 
technique. In itself it is neutral, neither good nor bad, and 
any ultimate views that we may have about what gives 
value to this or that must come from some other source 
than science. 

The men of science, in spite of their profound influence 
upon modern life, are in some ways less powerful than the 
politicians. Politicians in our day are far more influential 
than they were at any former period in human history. 
Their relation to the men of science is like that of a 
magician in the Arabian Nights to a djinn who obeys his 
orders. The djinn does astounding things which the 
magician, without his help, could not do, but he does them 
only because he is told to do them, not because of any 
impulse in himself. So it is with the atomic scientists in our 
day; some government captures them in their homes or on 
the high seas, and they are set to work, according to the 
luck of their capture, to slave for the one side or for the 
other. The politician, when he is successful, is subject to no 
such coercion. The most astounding career of our times 
was that of Lenin. After his brother had been put to death 
by the Czarist Government, he spent years in poverty and 
exile, and then rose within a few months to command of 
one of the greatest of States. And this command was not 
like that of Xerxes or Caesar, merely the power to enjoy 
luxury and adulation, which but for him some other man 
would have been enjoying. It was the power to mould a 
vast country according to a pattern conceived in his own 
mind, to alter the life of every worker, every peasant, and 



44 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


every middle-class person; to introduce a totally new kind 
of organisation, and to become throughout the world the 
symbol of a new order, admired by some, execrated by 
many, but ignored by none. No megalomaniac’s dream 
could have been more terrific. Napoleon had asserted that 
you can do everything with bayonets except sit upon them; 
Lenin disproved the exception. 

The great men who stand out in history have been partly 
benefactors of mankind and partly quite the reverse. Some, 
like the great religious and moral innovators, have done 
what lay in their power to make men less cruel towards 
each other, and less limited in their sympathies; some, like 
the men of science, have given us a knowledge and 
understanding of natural processes which, however it may 
be misused, must be regarded as in itself a splendid thing. 
Some, like the great poets and composers and painters, 
have put into the world beauties and splendours which, in 
moments of discouragement, do much to make the 
spectacle of human destiny endurable. But others, equally 
able, equally effective in their way, have done quite the 
opposite. I cannot think of anything that mankind has 
gained by the existence of Jenghis Khan. I do not know 
what good came of Robespierre, and, for my part, I see no 
reason to be grateful to Lenin. But all these men, good and 
bad alike, had a quality which I should not wish to see 
disappear from the world— a quality of energy and 
personal initiative, of independence of mind, and of 
imaginative vision. A man who possesses these qualities is 
capable of doing much good, or of doing great harm, and 
if mankind is not to sink into dullness such exceptional 
men must find scope, though one could wish that the 
scope they find should be for the benefit of mankind. 
There may be less difference than is sometimes thought 
between the temperament of a great criminal and a great 
statesman. It may be that Captain Kidd and Alexander the 
Great, if a magician had interchanged them at birth, would 
have each fulfilled the career which, in fact, was fulfilled by 
the other. The same thing may be said of some artists; the 
memoirs of Benvenuto Cellini do not give a picture of a 
man with that respect for law which every right-minded 
citizen ought to have. In the modern world, and still more, 



THE ROLE OF INDIVIDUALITY 45 


so far as can be guessed, in the world of the near future, 
important achievement is and will be almost impossible to 
an individual if he cannot dominate some vast 
organisation. If he can make himself head of a State like 
Lenin, or monopolist of a great industry like Rockefeller, or 
a controller of credit like the elder Pierpont Morgan, he can 
produce enormous effects in the world. And so he can if, 
being a man of science, he persuades some government 
that his work may be useful in war. But the man who works 
without the help of an organisation, like a Hebrew prophet, 
a poet, or a solitary philosopher such as Spinoza, can no 
longer hope for the kind of importance which such men 
had in former days. The change applies to the scientist as 
well as to other men. The scientists of the past did their 
work very largely as individuals, but the scientist of our day 
needs enormously expensive equipment and a laboratory 
with many assistants. All this he can obtain through the 
favour of the government, or, in America, of very rich men. 
He is thus no longer an independent worker, but essentially 
part and parcel of some large organisation. This change is 
very fortunate, for the things which a great man could do in 
solitude were apt to be more beneficial than those which 
he can only do with the help of the powers that be. A man 
who wishes to influence human affairs finds it difficult to 
be successful, except as a slave or a tyrant: as a politician 
he may make himself the head of a State, or as a scientist 
he may sell his labour to the government, but in that case 
he must serve its purposes and not his own. 

And this applies not only to men of rare and exceptional 
greatness, but to a wide range of talent. In the ages in 
which there were great poets, there were also large 
numbers of little poets, and when there were great painters 
there were large numbers of little painters. The great 
German composers arose in a milieu where music was 
valued, and where numbers of lesser men found 
opportunities. In those days poetry, painting, and music 
were a vital part of the daily life of ordinary men, as only 
sport is now. The great prophets were men who stood out 
from a host of minor prophets. The inferiority of our age in 
such respects is an inevitable result of the fact that society 
is centralised and organised to such a degree that 



46 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


individual initiative is reduced to a minimum. Where art has 
flourished in the past it has flourished as a rule amongst 
small communities which had rivals among their 
neighbours, such as the Greek City States, the little 
Principalities of the Italian Renaissance, and the petty 
Courts of German eighteenth-century rulers. Each of these 
rulers had to have his musician, and once in a way he was 
Johann Sebastian Bach, but even if he was not he was still 
free to do his best. There is something about local rivalry 
that is essential in such matters. It played its part even in 
the building of the cathedrals, because each bishop wished 
to have a finer cathedral than the neighbouring bishop. It 
would be a good thing if cities could develop an artistic 
pride leading them to mutual rivalry, and if each had its 
own school of music and painting, not without a vigorous 
contempt for the school of the next city. But such local 
patriotisms do not readily flourish in a world of empires 
and free mobility. A Manchester man does not readily feel 
towards a man from Sheffield as an Athenian felt towards a 
Corinthian, or a Florentine towards a Venetian. But in spite 
of the difficulties, I think that this problem of giving 
importance to localities will have to be tackled if human life 
is not to become increasingly drab and monotonous. 

The savage, in spite of his membership of a small 
community, lived a life in which his initiative was not too 
much hampered by the community. The things that he 
wanted to do, usually hunting and war, were also the 
things that his neighbours wanted to do, and if he felt an 
inclination to become a medicine man he only had to 
ingratiate himself with some individual already eminent in 
that profession, and so, in due course, to succeed to his 
powers of magic. If he was a man of exceptional talent, he 
might invent some improvement in weapons, or a new skill 
in hunting. These would not put him into any opposition to 
the community, but, on the contrary, would be welcomed. 
The modern man lives a very different life. If he sings in the 
street he will be thought to be drunk, and if he dances a 
policeman will reprove him for impeding the traffic. His 
working day, unless he is exceptionally fortunate, is 
occupied in a completely monotonous manner in producing 
something which is valued, not, like the shield of Achilles, 



THE ROLE OF INDIVIDUALITY 47 


as a beautiful piece of work, but mainly for its utility. When 
his work is over, he cannot, like Milton’s Shepherd, ‘tell his 
tale under the hawthorn in the dale,’ because there is often 
no dale anywhere near where he lives, or, if there is, it is 
full of tins. And always, in our highly regularised way of 
life, he is obsessed by thoughts of the morrow. Of all the 
precepts in the Gospels, the one that Christians have most 
neglected is the commandment to take no thought for the 
morrow. If he is prudent, thought for the morrow will lead 
him to save; if he is imprudent, it will make him 
apprehensive of being unable to pay his debts. In either 
case the moment loses its savour. Everything is organised, 
nothing is spontaneous. The Nazis organised ‘Strength 
Through Joy’, but joy prescribed by the government is 
likely to be not very joyful. In those who might otherwise 
have worthy ambitions, the effect of centralisation is to 
bring them into competition with too large a number of 
rivals, and into subjection to an unduly uniform standard 
of taste. If you wish to be a painter you will not be content 
to pit yourself against the men with similar desires in your 
own town; you will go to some school of painting in a 
metropolis where you will probably conclude that you are 
mediocre, and having come to this conclusion you may be 
so discouraged that you are tempted to throw away your 
paint-brushes and take to money-making or to drink, for a 
certain degree of self-confidence is essential to 
achievement. In Renaissance Italy you might have hoped to 
be the best painter in Siena, and this position would have 
been quite sufficiently honourable. But you would not now 
be content to acquire all your training in one small town 
and pit yourself against your neighbours. We know too 
much and feel too little. At least we feel too little of those 
creative emotions from which a good life springs. In regard 
to what is important we are passive; where we are active it 
is over trivialities. If life is to be saved from boredom 
relieved only by disaster, means must be found of restoring 
individual initiative, not only in things that are trivial, but in 
the things that really matter. I do not mean that we should 
destroy those parts of modern organisation upon which the 
very existence of large populations depends, but I do mean 
that organisation should be much more flexible, more 



48 AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 


relieved by local autonomy, and less oppressive to 
the human spirit through its impersonal vastness, than it 
has become through its unbearably rapid growth and 
centralisation, with which our ways of thought and feeling 
have been able to keep pace. 



Lecture 4 

The Conflict of Technique and 
Human Nature 


Man differs from other animals in many ways. One of these 
is, that he is willing to engage in activities that are 
unpleasant in themselves, because they are means to ends 
that he desires. Animals do things that, from the point of 
view of the biologist, seem to be labour for a purpose: 
birds build nests, and beavers build dams. But they do 
these things from instinct, because they have an impulse to 
do them, and not because they perceive that they are useful. 
They do not practise self-control or prudence or foresight 
or restraint of impulses by the will. Human beings do all 
these things. When they do more of them than human 
nature can endure, they suffer a psychological penalty. Part 
of this penalty is unavoidable in a civilised way of life, but 
much of it is unnecessary, and could be removed by a 
different type of social organisation. 

Early man had little of this conflict between means and 
impulses. Hunting, combat, and propagation were 
necessary for survival and for evolutionary progress, but 
that was not his reason for engaging in these activities: he 
engaged in them because they gave him pleasure. Hunting 
became, in time, an amusement of the idle rich; it had lost 
its biological usefulness, but remained enjoyable. Combat, 
of the simple sort directly inspired by impulse, is now only 
permitted to school-boys, but combativeness remains, 
and, if denied a better outlet, finds its most important 
expression in war. 

Early man, however, was not wholly without activities 
that he felt to be useful rather than intrinsically attractive. 
At a very early stage in human evolution the making of 
stone implements began, and so inaugurated the long 



50 THE CONFLICT OF TECHNIQUE AND HUMAN NATURE 


development that led up to our present elaborate economic 
system. But in the early Stone Age it is possible that the 
pleasure of artistic creation and of prospective increase of 
power diffused itself over the laborious stages of the work. 
When the journey from means to end is not too long, the 
means themselves are enjoyed if the end is ardently 
desired. A boy will toil up hill with a toboggan for the sake 
of the few brief moments of bliss during the descent; no 
one has to urge him to be industrious, and however he may 
puff and pant he is still happy. But if instead of the 
immediate reward you promised him an old-age pension at 
seventy, his energy would very quickly flag. 

Much longer efforts than those of the boy with the 
toboggan can be inspired by a creative impulse, and still 
remain spontaneous. A man may spend years of hardship, 
danger, and poverty in attempts to climb Everest or reach 
the South Pole or make a scientific discovery, and live all 
the while as much in harmony with his own impulses as the 
boy with the toboggan, provided he ardently desires the 
end and puts his pride into overcoming obstacles. As the 
Red Indian said, ‘there’s glory in it’. 

The introduction of slavery began the divorce between 
the purpose of the work and the purposes of the worker. 
The Pyramids were built for the glory of the Pharaohs; the 
slaves who did the work had no share in the glory, and 
worked only from fear of the overseer’s lash. Agriculture, 
when carried on by slaves or serfs, equally brought no 
direct satisfaction to those who did the work; their 
satisfaction was only that of being alive and (with luck) free 
from physical pain. 

In modern times before the Industrial Revolution, the 
diminution of serfdom and the growth of handicrafts 
increased the number of workers who were their own 
masters, and who could therefore enjoy some pride in what 
they produced. It was this state of affairs that gave rise to 
the type of democracy advocated by Jefferson and the 
French Revolution, which assumed a vast number of more 
or less independent producers, as opposed to the huge 
economic organisations that modern technique has created. 

Consider a large factory, say one that makes motor cars. 
The purpose of the organisation is to make cars, but the 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 51 


purpose of the workers is to earn wages. Subjectively, there 
is no common purpose. The uniting purpose exists only in 
owners and managers, and may be completely absent in 
most of those who do the work. Some may be proud of the 
excellence of the cars produced, but most, through their 
unions, are mainly concerned with wages and hours of 
work. 

To a considerable extent, this evil is inseperable from 
mechanisation combined with large size. Owing to the 
former, no man makes a large part of a car, but only one 
small share of some one part; a great deal of work requires 
little skill, and is completely monotonous. Owing to the 
latter (the large size of the organisation) the group who 
collectively make a car have no unity and no sense of 
solidarity as between management and employees. There is 
solidarity among the wage-earners, and there may be 
solidarity in the management. But the solidarity of the 
wage-earners has no relation to the product; it is 
concerned to increase wages and diminish hours of work. 
The management may have a pride in the product, but 
when an industry is thoroughly commercialised there is a 
tendency to think only of profit, which may often be 
secured more easily by advertisement than by improved 
workmanship. 

Two things have led to a diminished pride in 
workmanship. The earlier was the invention of currency; 
the later was mass production. Currency led to the 
valuation of an article by its pride, which is something not 
intrinsic, but an abstraction shared with other commodities. 
Things not made to be exchanged may be valued for what 
they are, not for what they will buy. Cottage gardens in 
county villages are often lovely, and may have cost much 
labour, but are not intended to bring any monetary reward. 
Peasant costumes, which now hardly exist except for the 
delectation of tourists, were made by their wearers’ 
families, and had no price. The temples of the Acropolis 
and the medieval cathedrals were not built with any 
pecuniary motive, and were not capable of being 
exchanged. Very gradually, a money economy has replaced 
an economy in which things were produced for the use of 



52 THE CONFLICT OF TECHNIQUE AND HUMAN NATURE 


the producer, and this change has caused commodities to 
be viewed as useful rather than delightful. 

Mass production has carried this process to new lengths. 
Suppose you are a manufacturer of buttons: however 
excellent your buttons may be, you do not want more than 
a few for your own use. All the rest you wish to exchange 
for food and shelter, a motor car and your children’s 
education, and so on. These various things share nothing 
with the buttons except money value. And it is not even the 
money value of the buttons that is important to you; what 
is important is profit, i.e. the excess of their selling value 
above the cost of production, which may be increased by 
diminishing their intrinsic excellence. Indeed a loss of 
intrinsic excellence usually results when mass production is 
substituted for more primitive methods. 

There are two consequences of modern organisation, in 
addition to those already mentioned, that tend to diminish 
the producer’s interest in the product. One is the 
remoteness of the gain to be expected from the work; the 
other is the divorce between the management and the 
worker. 

As for the remoteness of the gain: suppose you are 
engaged at the present time in some subordinate part of 
the manufacture of some commodity for export— let us say 
again a motor car. You are told, with much emphasis, that 
the export drive is necessary in order that we may be able 
to buy food. The extra food that is bought as a result of 
your labour does not come to you personally, but is divided 
among the forty million or so who inhabit Britain. If you are 
absent from work one day, there is no visible harm to the 
national economy. It is only by an intellectual effort that 
you can make yourself aware of the harm that you do by 
not working, and only by a moral effort that you can make 
yourself do more work than is necessary in order to keep 
your job. The whole thing is completely different when the 
need is obvious and pressing, for instance, in a shipwreck. 
In a shipwreck the crew obey orders without the need of 
reasoning with themselves, because they have a common 
purpose which is not remote, and the means to its 
realisation are not difficult to understand. But if the captain 
were obliged, like the government, to explain the principles 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 53 


of currency in order to prove his commands wise, the ship 
would sink before his lecture was finished. 

Divorce between the management and the worker has 
two aspects, one of which is the familiar conflict of capital 
and labour, while the other is a more general trouble 
afflicting all large organisations. I do not propose to say 
anything about the conflict of labour and capital, but the 
remoteness of government, whether in a political or an 
economic organisation, whether under capitalism or under 
socialism, is a somewhat less trite theme, and deserves to 
be considered. 

However society may be organised, there is inevitably a 
large area of conflict between the general interest and the 
interest of this or that section. A rise in the price of coal 
may be advantageous to the coal industry and f acilitate an 
increase in miners’ wages, but is disadvantageous to 
everybody else. When prices and wages are fixed by the 
government, every decision must disappoint somebody. 
The considerations which should weigh with the 
government are so general, and so apparently removed 
from the everyday life of the workers, that it is very difficult 
to make them appear cogent. A concentrated advantage is 
always more readily appreciated than a diffused 
disadvantage. It is for this sort of reason that governments 
find it difficult to resist inflation, and that, when they do, 
they are apt to become unpopular. A government which 
acts genuinely in the interests of the general public runs a 
risk of being thought by each section to be perversely 
ignoring the interests of that section. This is a difficulty 
which, in a democracy, tends to be increased by every 
increase in the degree of governmental control. 

Moreover, it would be unduly optimistic to expect that 
governments, even if democratic, will always do what is 
best in the public interest. I have spoken before of some 
evils connected with bureaucracy; I wish now to consider 
those involved in the relation of the official to the public. In 
a highly organised community those who exercise 
governmental functions, from Ministers down to the most 
junior employees in local offices, have their own private 
interests, which by no means coincide with those of the 
community. Of these, love of power and dislike of work are 



54 THE CONFLICT OF TECHNIQUE AND HUMAN NATURE 


the chief. A civil servant who says ‘no’ to a project satisfies 
at once his pleasure in exercising authority and his 
disinclination for effort. And so he comes to seem, and to a 
certain extent to be, the enemy of those whom he is 
supposed to serve. 

Take, as an illustration, the measures necessary for 
dealing with a shortage of food. If you possess an 
allotment, the difficulty of obtaining food may lead you to 
work hard if you are allowed to use your produce to 
supplement your rations. But most people must buy all 
their food unless they are engaged in agriculture. Under 
laissez-faire, prices would soar, and all except the rich 
would be seriously undernourished. But although this is 
true, few of us are adequately grateful for the services of 
the ladies in food offices, and still fewer of them can 
preserve through fatigue and worry a wholly benevolent 
attitude to the public. To the public, the ladies appear, 
however unjustly, as ignorant despots; to the ladies, the 
public appear as tiresome, fussy, and stupid, perpetually 
losing things or changing their addresses. It is not easy to 
see how, out of such a situation, a genuine harmony 
between government and the governed can be produced. 

The ways which have hitherto been discovered of 
producing a partial harmony between private feelings and 
public interest have been open to objections of various 
kinds. 

The easiest and most obvious harmoniser is war. In a 
difficult war, when national self-preservation is in 
jeopardy, it is easy to induce everybody to work with a will, 
and if the government is thought competent its orders are 
readily obeyed. The situation is like that in a shipwreck. But 
no one would advocate shipwrecks as means of promoting 
naval discipline, and we cannot advocate wars on the 
ground that they cause national unity. No doubt something 
of the same effect can be produced by the fear of war, but 
if fear of war is acute for a long enough time it is pretty 
sure to result in actual war, and while it promotes national 
unity it also causes both lassitude and hysteria. 

Competition, where it exists, is an immensely powerful 
incentive. It has been generally decried by socialists as one 
of the evil things in a capitalist society, but the Soviet 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 55 


Government has restored it to a very important place in the 
organisation of industry. Stakhanovite methods, in which 
certain workers are rewarded for exceptional proficiency, 
while others are punished for shortcomings, are a revival of 
piecework systems against which trade unions have 
vigorously and successfully campaigned. I have no doubt 
that these systems have in Russia the merits formerly 
claimed by capitalists, and the demerits emphasised by 
trade unions. As a solution of the psychological problem 
they are certainly inadequate. 

But although competition, in many forms, is gravely 
objectionable, it has, I think, an essential part to play in the 
promotion of necessary effort, and in some spheres affords 
a comparatively harmless outlet for the kind of impulses 
that might otherwise lead to war. No one would advocate 
the abolition of competition in games. If two hitherto rival 
football teams, under the influence of brotherly love, 
decided to co-operate in placing the football first beyond 
one goal and then beyond the other, no one’s happiness 
would be increased. There is no reason why the zest 
derived from competition should be confined to athletics. 
Emulation between teams or localities or organisations can 
be a useful incentive. But if competition is not to become 
ruthless and harmful, the penalty for failure must not be 
disaster, as in war, or starvation, as in unregulated 
economic competition, but only loss of glory. Football 
would not be a desirable sport if defeated teams were put 
to death or left to starve. 

In Britain, in recent years, a gallant attempt has been 
made to appeal to the sense of duty. Austerity is, for the 
present, unavoidable, and increase of production is the 
only way out. This is undeniable, and an appeal of this sort 
is no doubt necessary during a time of crisis. But sense of 
duty, valuable and indispensable as it may sometimes be, 
is not a permanent solution, and is not likely to be 
successful over a long period. It involves a sense of strain, 
and a constant resistance to natural impulses, which, if 
continued, must be exhausting and productive of a 
diminution of natural energy. If it is urged, not on the basis 
of some simple traditional ethic such as the Ten 
Commandments, but on complicated economic and 



56 THE CONFLICT OF TECHNIQUE AND HUMAN NATURE 


political grounds, weariness will lead to scepticism as to 
the arguments involved, and many people will either 
become simply indifferent or adopt some probably untrue 
theory suggesting that there is a short cut to prosperity. 
Men can be stimulated by hope or driven by fear, but the 
hope and the fear must be vivid and immediate if they are 
to be effective without producing weariness. 

It is partly for this reason that hysterical propaganda, or 
at least propaganda intended to cause hysteria, has such 
widespread influence in the modern world. People are 
aware, in a general way, that their daily lives are affected 
by things that happen in distant parts of the world, but 
they have not the knowledge to understand how this 
happens, except in the case of a small number of experts. 
Why is there no rice? Why are bananas so rare? Why have 
oxen apparently ceased to have tails? If you lay the blame 
on India, or red tape, or the capitalist system, or the 
socialist State, you conjure up in people’s minds a mythical 
personified devil whom it is easy to hate. In every 
misfortune it is a natural impulse to look for an enemy 
upon whom to lay the blame; savages attribute all illness to 
hostile magic. Whenever the causes of our troubles are too 
difficult to be understood, we tend to fall back upon this 
primitive kind of explanation. A newspaper which offers us 
a villain to hate is much more appealing than one which 
goes into all the intricacies of dollar shortages. When the 
Germans suffered after the first world war, many of them 
were easily persuaded that the Jews were to blame. 

The appeal to hatred of a supposed enemy as the 
explanation of whatever is painful in our lives is usually 
destructive and disastrous; it stimulates primitive 
instinctive energy, but in ways the effects of which are 
catastrophic. There are various ways of diminishing the 
potency of appeals to hatred. The best way, obviously, 
where it is possible, is to cure the evils which cause us to 
look out for an enemy. Where this cannot be achieved, it 
may sometimes be possible to disseminate widely a true 
understanding of the causes that are producing our 
misfortune. But this is difficult so long as there are 
powerful forces in politics and in the Press which flourish 
by the encouragement of hysteria. 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 57 


I do not think that misfortune, by itself, produces the 
kind of hysterical hatred that led, for example, to the rise of 
the Nazis. There has to be a sense of frustration as well as 
misfortune. A Swiss family Robinson, finding plenty to do 
on their island, will not waste time on hatred. But in a more 
complex situation the activities that are in fact necessary 
may be far less capable of making an immediate appeal to 
individuals. In the present difficult state of British 
national economy, we know collectively what is needed: 
increased production, diminished consumption, and 
stimulation of exports. But these are large general matters, 
not very visibly related to the welfare of particular men and 
women. If the activities that are needed on such apparently 
remote grounds are to be carried out vigorously and 
cheerfully, ways must be devised of creating some more 
immediate reason for doing what the national economy 
requires. This, I think, demands controlled devolution, and 
opportunities for desirable more or less independent action 
by individuals or by groups that are not very large. 

Democracy, as it exists in large modern States, does not 
give adequate scope for political initiative except to a tiny 
minority. We are accustomed to pointing out that what the 
Greeks called ‘democracy’ fell short through the exclusion 
of women and slaves, but we do not always realise that in 
some important respects it was more democratic than 
anything that is possible when the governmental area is 
extensive. Every citizen could vote on every issue; he did 
not have to delegate his power to a representative. He 
could elect executive officers, including generals, and could 
get them condemned if they displeased a majority. The 
number of citizens was small enough for each man to feel 
that he counted, and that he could have a significant 
influence by discussion with his acquaintance. I am not 
suggesting that this system was good on the whole; it had, 
in fact, very grave disadvantages. But in the one respect of 
allowing for individual initiative it was very greatly superior 
to anything that exists in the modern world. 

Consider, for purposes of illustration, the relation of an 
ordinary taxpayer to an admiral. The taxpayers, 
collectively, are the admiral’s employers. Their agents in 
Parliament vote his pay, and choose the government which 



58 THE CONFLICT OF TECHNIQUE AND HUMAN NATURE 


sanctions the authority which appoints the admiral. But if 
the individual taxpayer were to attempt to assume towards 
the admiral the attitude of authority which is customary 
from employer to employee, he would soon be put in his 
place. The admiral is a great man, accustomed to 
exercising authority; the ordinary taxpayer is not. In a 
lesser degree the same sort of thing is true throughout the 
public services. Even if you only wish to register a letter at 
a Post Office, the official is in a position of momentary 
power; he can at least decide when to notice that you 
desire attention. If you want anything more complicated, he 
can, if he happens to be in a bad humour, cause you 
considerable annoyance; he can send you to another man, 
who may send you back to the first man; and yet both are 
reckoned ‘servants’ of the public. The ordinary voter, so far 
from finding himself the source of all the power of army, 
navy, police, and civil service, feels himself their humble 
subject, whose duty is, as the Chinese used to say, to 
‘tremble and obey’. So long as democratic control is 
remote and rare, while public administration is centralised 
and authority is delegated from the centre to the 
circumference, this sense of individual impotence before 
the powers that be is difficult to avoid. And yet it must be 
avoided if democracy is to be a reality in feeling and not 
merely in governmental machinery. 

Most of the evils that we have been concerned with in 
this lecture are no new thing. Ever since the dawn of 
civilisation most people in civilised communities have led 
lives full of misery; glory, adventure, initiative were for the 
privileged few, while for the multitude there was a life of 
severe toil with occasional harsh cruelty. But the Western 
nations first, and gradually the whole world, have 
awakened to a new ideal. We are no longer content that the 
few should enjoy all the good things while the many are 
wretched. The evils of early industrialism caused a thrill of 
horror which they would not have caused in Roman times. 
Slavery was abolished because it was felt that no human 
being should be regarded merely as an instrument to the 
prosperity of another. We no longer attempt, at least in 
theory, to defend the exploitation of coloured races by 
white conquerors. Socialism was inspired by the wish to 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 59 


diminish the gap between rich and poor. In all directions, 
there has been a revolt against injustice and inequality, and 
an unwillingness to build a brilliant superstructure on a 
foundation of suffering and degradation. 

This new belief is now so generally taken for granted that 
it is not sufficiently realised how revolutionary it is in the 
long history of mankind. In this perspective the last 
hundred and sixty years appear as a continuous revolution 
inspired by this idea. Like all new beliefs that are 
influential, it is uncomfortable, and demands difficult 
adjustments. There is a danger— as there has been with 
other gospels— lest means should be mistaken for ends, 
with the result that ends are forgotten. There is a risk that, 
in the pursuit of equality, good things which there is 
difficulty in distributing evenly may not be admitted to be 
good. Some of the unjust societies of the past gave to a 
minority opportunities which, if we are not careful, the new 
society that we seek to build may give to no one. When I 
speak of the evils of the present day, I do so, not to suggest 
that they are greater than those of the past, but only to 
make sure that what was good in the past should be carried 
over into the future, as far as possible unharmed by the 
transition. But if this is to be achieved, some things must 
be remembered which are apt to be forgotten in blue- 
prints of Utopia. 

Among the things which are in danger of being 
unnecessarily sacrificed to democratic equality, perhaps the 
most important is self-respect. By self-respect I mean the 
good half of pride— what is called ‘proper pride’. The bad 
half is a sense of superiority. Self-respect will keep a man 
from being abject when he is in the power of enemies, and 
will enable him to feel that he may be in the right when the 
world is against him. If a man has not this quality, he will 
feel that majority opinion, or governmental opinion, is to 
be treated as infallible, and such a way of feeling, if it is 
general, makes both moral and intellectual progress 
impossible. 

Self-respect has been hitherto, of necessity, a virtue of 
the minority. Wherever there is inequality of power, it is not 
likely to be found among those who are subject to the rule 
of others. One of the most revolting features of tyrannies is 



60 THE CONFLICT OF TECHNIQUE AND HUMAN NATURE 


the way in which they lead the victims of injustice to offer 
adulation to those who ill-treat them. Roman gladiators 
saluted the emperors who were about to cause half of them 
to be slaughtered for amusement. Dostoevski and Bakunin, 
when in prison, pretended to think well of the Czar 
Nicholas. Those who are liquidated by the Soviet 
Government very frequently make an abject confession of 
sinfulness, while those who escape the purges indulge in 
nauseous flatteries and not infrequently try to incriminate 
colleagues. A democratic regime is likely to avoid these 
grosser forms of self-abasement, and can give complete 
opportunity for the preservation of self-respect. But it may 
do quite the opposite. 

Since self-respect has, in the past, been, in the main, 
confined to the privileged minority, it may easily be 
undervalued by those who are in opposition to an 
established oligarchy. And those who believe that the voice 
of the people is the voice of God may infer that any unusual 
opinion or peculiar taste is almost a form of impiety, and is 
to be viewed as a culpable rebellion against the legitimate 
authority of the herd. This will only be avoided if liberty is 
as much valued as democracy, and it is realised that a 
society in which each is the slave of all is only a little better 
than one in which each is the slave of a despot. There is 
equality where all are slaves, as well as where all are free. 
This shows that equality, by itself, is not enough to make a 
good society. 

Perhaps the most important problem in an industrial 
society, and certainly one of the most difficult, is that Of 
making work interesting, in the sense of being no longer 
merely a means to wages. This is a problem which arises 
especially in relation to unskilled work. Work that is 
difficult is likely to be attractive to those who are able to do 
it. Crossword puzzles and chess are closely analogous to 
some kinds of skilled work, and yet many people spend 
much effort on them, merely for pleasure. But with the 
increase of machinery there is a continual increase in the 
proportion of wage-earners whose work is completely 
monotonous and completely easy. Professor Abercrombie, 
in his Greater London Plan, 1944, points out, incidentally 
and without emphasis, that most modern industries require 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 61 


no specialised aptitudes and therefore need not be sited in 
districts where traditional skills exist. He says: ‘Non- 
dependence on any one labour pool is further emphasised 
by the nature of modern work, which demands relatively 
little skill, but a high degree of steadiness and reliability; 
these are qualities which can be found almost anywhere 
among the working class population today.’ 

‘Steadiness and reliability’ are certainly very useful 
qualities, but if they are all that a man’s work demands of 
him, it is not likely that he will find his work interesting, 
and it is pretty certain that such satisfaction as his life may 
offer him will have to be found outside working hours. I do 
not believe that this is wholly unavoidable, even when the 
work is in itself monotonous and uninteresting. 

The first requisite is to restore to the worker some of the 
feelings connected in the past with ownership. Actual 
ownership by an individual worker is not possible when 
machinery is involved, but there can be ways of securing the 
kind of pride associated with the feeling that this is ‘my’ 
work, or at any rate ‘our’ work, where ‘our’ refers to a 
group small enough to know each other and have an active 
sense of solidarity. This is not secured by nationalisation, 
which leaves managers and officials almost as remote from 
the workers as they are under a capitalist regime. What is 
needed is local small-scale democracy in all internal 
affairs; foremen and managers should be elected by those 
over whom they are to have authority. 

The impersonal and remote character of those in 
authority over an industrial undertaking is fatal to any 
proprietorial interest on the part of the ordinary employee. 
Mr Burnham’s ‘Managerial Revolution’ presents a far from 
cheerful picture of the possibilities in the near future. If we 
wish to avoid the drab world that he prophesies, the thing 
of first importance is to democratise management. This 
subject is dealt with admirably in Mr James Gillespie’s Free 
Expression in industry, and I cannot do better than quote 
from him. He says: 

‘There is a sense of frustration when an individual or a 
group has a serious problem and cannot get to the top with 
it. As in civil bureaucracy, so it is in industrial bureaucracy 
—there are the same delays, the reference to X or Y, the 



62 THE CONFLICT OF TECHNIQUE AND HUMAN NATURE 


statement of the rules and the same feeling of helplessness 
and frustration. “If I could only get to the chief, he would 
know, he would see....” This desire to get to the top is very 
real and very important. The monthly meeting of 
representatives of employee groups is not without value, 
but it is not an effective substitute for a face-to-face 
relationship between owner and employee. It does not help 
this situation when a shop steward, or an operator, goes to 
the foreman with a problem and the foreman, shorn of 
authority, through transfer of controls, can do nothing but 
pass it on to the superintendent. He, in turn, passes it to 
the works manager who puts it on the agenda for the next 
meeting. Or the matter may be referred to the welfare 
department, a big department in a big company, and a 
substitute for the welfare or personnel manager, himself a 
substitute for one role of managing director or owner, 
deals with it or passes it on. 

‘In the large company there is more than a sense of 
frustration; there is a peculiar meaninglessness about its 
operations to the member of the rank and file. He knows 
little of the significance of his job in the company as a 
whole. He does not know who is the real boss; he 
frequently does not know who is the General Manager, 
and, of ten enough, he has never been spoken to by the 
head Works Manager. The Sales Manager, the Cost 
Manager, the Planning Manager, the Chief Welfare Manager 
and many others, are just people with good jobs and short 
hours. He has no part with them, they do not belong to his 
group.’ 

Democracy, whether in politics or in industry, is not a 
psychological reality so long as the government or the 
management is regarded as ‘they’, a remote body which 
goes its lordly way and which it is natural to regard with 
hostility— a hostility that is impotent unless it takes the 
form of rebellion. In industry, as Mr Gillespie points out, 
very little has been done in this direction, and management 
is, with rare exceptions, frankly monarchical or oligarchic. 
This is an evil which, if left unchecked, tends to increase 
with every increase in the size of organisations. 

Ever since history began, the majority of mankind have 
lived under a load of poverty and suffering and cruelty, and 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 63 


have felt themselves impotent under the sway of hostile or 
coldly impersonal powers. These evils are no longer 
necessary to the existence of civilisation; they can be 
removed by the help of modern science and modern 
technique, provided these are used in a humane spirit and 
with an understanding of the springs of life and happiness. 
Without such understanding, we may inadvertently create a 
new prison, just, perhaps, since none will be outside it, but 
dreary and joyless and spiritually dead. How such a 
disaster is to be averted, I shall consider in my last two 
lectures. 


Postscript 

An interesting and painful example of the decay of quality 
through modern machine methods is afforded by the 
Scottish tweed industry. Hand-woven tweeds, universally 
acknowledged to be of superlative excellence, have long 
been produced in the Highlands, the Hebrides and the 
Orkney and Shetland Islands, but the competition of 
machine-woven tweeds has hit the hand-weavers very 
hard, and the purchase tax, according to debates in both 
Houses of Parliament, is giving them their coup de grace. 
The result is that those who can no longer make a living by 
exercising their craft are compelled to leave the islands and 
Highlands to live in cities or even to emigrate. 

Against the short-term economic gain of a purchase tax 
which brings in from £1,000,000 to £1,500,000 a year 
must be placed long-term losses which are hardly 
calculable. 

First, there is the loss, added to those we have already 
suffered in the blind and greedy heyday of the Industrial 
Revolution, of one more local and traditional skill, which 
has brought to those who exercised it the joy of 
craftsmanship and a way of life which, though hard, gave 
pride and self-respect and the joy of achievement, through 
ingenuity and effort, in circumstances of difficulty and risk. 

Secondly, there is the diminution in the intrinsic 
excellence of the product, both aesthetic and utilitarian. 

Thirdly, this murder of a local industry aggravates the 
tendency to uncontrollable growth of cities, which we are 



64 THE CONFLICT OF TECHNIQUE AND HUMAN NATURE 


attempting in our national town planning to avoid. The 
independent weavers become units in a vast, hideous and 
unhealthy human ant-hill. Their economic security is no 
longer dependent on their own skill and upon the forces of 
nature. It is lost in a few large organisations, in which if 
one fails all fail, and the causes of failure cannot be 
understood. 

Two factors make this process— a microcosm of the 
Industrial Revolution— inexcusable at this date. On the one 
hand, unlike the early industrialists, who could not see the 
consequences of their own acts, we know the resultant 
evils all too well. On the other hand, these evils are no 
longer necessary for the increase of production, or for the 
raising of the material standards of living of the worker. 
Electricity and motor-transport have made small units of 
industry not only economically permissible but even 
desirable, for they obviate immense expenditure on 
transportation and organisation. Where a rural industry still 
flourishes, it should be gradually mechanised, but be left in 
situ and in small units. 

In those parts of the world in which industrialism is still 
young, the possibility of avoiding the horrors we have 
experienced still exists. India, for example, is traditionally a 
land of village communities. It would be a tragedy if this 
traditional way of life with all its evils were to be suddenly 
and violently exchanged for the greater evils of urban 
industrialism, as they would apply to people whose 
standard of living is already pitifully low. Gandhi, realising 
these dangers, attempted to put the clock back by reviving 
hand-loom weaving throughout the continent. He was half 
right, but it is folly to reject the advantages that science 
gives us; instead they should be seized with eagerness and 
applied to increase the material wealth and, at the same 
time, to preserve these simple privileges of pure air, of 
status in a small community, of pride in responsibility and 
work well done, which are rarely possible for the worker in 
a large industrial town. The rivers of the Himalayas should 
provide all the hydro-electric power that is needed for the 
gradual mechanisation of the village industries of India and 
for immeasurable improvement of physical well-being, 
without either the obvious disaster of industrial slump or 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 65 


the more subtle loss and degradation which results when 
age-old traditions are too rudely broken. 



66 



Lecture 5 

Control and Initiative: their 
Respective Spheres 


A healthy and progressive society requires both central 
control and individual and group initiative: without control 
there is anarchy, and without initiative there is stagnation. I 
want in this lecture to arrive at some general principles as 
to what matters should be controlled and what should be 
left to private or semi-private initiative. Some of the 
qualities that we should wish to find in a community are in 
their essence static, while others are by their very nature 
dynamic. Speaking very roughly, we may expect the static 
qualities to be suitable for governmental control, while the 
dynamic qualities should be promoted by the initiative of 
individuals or groups. But if such initiative is to be 
possible, and if it is to be fruitful rather than destructive, it 
will need to be fostered by appropriate institutions, and the 
safeguarding of such institutions will have to be one of the 
functions of government. It is obvious that in a state of 
anarchy there could not be universities or scientific 
research or publication of books, or even such simple 
things as seaside holidays. In our complex world, there 
cannot be fruitful initiative without government, but 
unfortunately there can be government without initiative. 

The primary aims of government, I suggest, should be 
three: security, justice, and conservation. These are things 
of the utmost importance to human happiness, and they 
are things which only government can bring about. At the 
same time, no one of them is absolute; each may, in some 
circumstances, have to be sacrificed in some degree for the 
sake of a greater degree of some other good. I shall say 
something about each in turn. 



68 CONTROL AND INITIATIVE: THEIR RESPECTIVE SPHERES 


Security, in the sense of protection of life and property, 
has always been recognised as one of the primary purposes 
of the State. Many States, however, while safeguarding law- 
abiding citizens against other citizens, have not thought it 
necessary to protect them against the Sea. Wherever there 
is arrest by administrative order, and punishment without 
due process of law, private people have no security, 
however firmly the State may be established. And even 
insistence on due process of law is insufficient, unless the 
judges are independent of the executive. This order of 
ideas was to the fore in the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries, under the slogan ‘liberty of the subject’ or 
‘rights of man’. But the ‘liberty’ and the ‘rights’ that were 
sought could only be secured by the State, and then only if 
the State was of the kind that is called ‘Liberal’. It is only in 
the West that this liberty and these rights have been 
secured. 

To inhabitants of Western countries in the present day, a 
more interesting kind of security is security against attacks 
by hostile States. This is more interesting because it has not 
been secured, and because it becomes more important 
year by year as methods of warfare develop. This kind of 
security will only become possible when there is a single 
world government with a monopoly of all the major 
weapons of war. I shall not enlarge upon this subject, since 
it is somewhat remote from my theme. I will only say, with 
all possible emphasis, that unless and until mankind have 
achieved the security of a single government for the world, 
everything else of value, of no matter what kind, is 
precarious, and may at any moment be destroyed by war. 

Economic security has been one of the most important 
aims of modern British legislation. Insurance against 
unemployment, sickness, and destitution in old age, has 
removed from the lives of wage-earners a great deal of 
painful uncertainty as to their future. Medical security has 
been promoted by measures which have greatly increased 
the average length of life and diminished the amount of 
illness. Altogether, life in Western countries, apart from 
war, is very much less dangerous than it was in the 
eighteenth century, and this change is mainly due to 
various kinds of governmental control. 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 69 


Security, though undoubtedly a good thing, may be 
sought excessively and become a fetish. A secure life is not 
necessarily a happy life; it may be rendered dismal by 
boredom and monotony. Many people, especially while 
they are young, welcome a spice of dangerous adventure, 
and may even find relief in war as an escape from humdrum 
safety. Security by itself is a negative aim inspired by fear; 
a satisfactory life must have a positive aim inspired by 
hope. This sort of adventurous hope involves risk and 
therefore fear. But fear deliberately chosen is not such an 
evil thing as fear forced upon a man by outward 
circumstances. We cannot therefore be content with 
security alone, or imagine that it can bring the millennium. 

And now as to justice: 

Justice, especially economic justice, has become, in quite 
recent times, a governmental purpose. Justice has come to 
be interpreted as equality, except where exceptional merit 
is thought to deserve an exceptional but still moderate 
reward. Political justice, i.e. democracy, has been aimed at 
since the American and French Revolutions, but economic 
justice is a newer aim, and requires a much greater amount 
of governmental control. It is held by Socialists, rightly, in 
my opinion, to involve State ownership of key industries 
and considerable regulation of foreign trade. Opponents of 
Socialism may argue that economic justice can be too 
dearly bought, but no one can deny that, if it is to be 
achieved, a very large amount of State control over industry 
and finance is essential. 

There are, however, limits to economic justice which are, 
at least tacitly, acknowledged by even the most ardent of 
its Western advocates. For example, it is of the utmost 
importance to seek out ways of approaching economic 
equality by improving the position of the less fortunate 
parts of the world, not only because there is an immense 
sum of unhappiness to be relieved, but also because the 
world cannot be stable or secure against great wars while 
glaring inequalities persist. But an attempt to bring about 
economic equality between Western nations and South- 
east Asia, by any but gradual methods, would drag the 
more prosperous nations down to the level of the less 



70 CONTROL AND INITIATIVE: THEIR RESPECTIVE SPHERES 


prosperous, without any appreciable advantage to the 
latter. 

Justice, like security, but to an even greater degree, is a 
principle which is subject to limitations. There is justice 
where all are equally poor as well as where all are equally 
rich, but it would seem fruitless to make the rich poorer if 
this was not going to make the poor richer. The case 
against justice is even stronger if, in the pursuit of 
equality, it is going to make even the poor poorer than 
before. And this might well happen if a general lowering of 
education and a diminution of fruitful research were 
involved. If there had not been economic injustice in Egypt 
and Babylon, the art of writing would never have been 
invented. There is, however, no necessity, with modern 
methods of production, to perpetuate economic injustice in 
industrially developed nations in order to promote 
progress in the arts of civilisation. There is only a danger to 
be born in mind, not, as in the past, a technical 
impossibility. 

I come now to my third head, conservation. 

Conservation, like security and justice, demands action 
by the State. I mean by ‘conservation’ not only the 
preservation of ancient monuments and beauty-spots, the 
upkeep of roads and public utilities, and so on. These 
things are done at present, except in time of war. What I 
have chiefly in mind is the preservation of the world’s 
natural resources. This is a matter of enormous 
importance, to which very little attention has been paid. 
During the past hundred and fifty years mankind has used 
up the raw materials of industry and the soil upon which 
agriculture depends, and this wasteful expenditure 
of natural capital has proceeded with ever-increasing 
velocity. In relation to industry, the most striking example 
is oil. The amount of accessible oil in the world is unknown, 
but is certainly not unlimited; already the need for it has 
reached the point at which there is a risk of its contributing 
to bringing about a third world war. When oil is no longer 
available in large quantities, a great deal will have to be 
changed in our way of life. If we try to substitute atomic 
energy, that will only result in exhaustion of the available 
supplies of uranium and thorium. Industry as it exists at 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 71 


present depends essentially upon the expenditure of 
natural capital, and cannot long continue in its present 
prodigal fashion. 

Even more serious, according to some authorities, is the 
situation in regard to agriculture, as set forth with great 
vividness in Mr Vogt’s Road to Survival. Except in a few 
favoured areas (of which Western Europe is one), the 
prevailing methods of cultivating the soil rapidly exhaust 
its fertility. The growth of the Dust Bowl in America is the 
best known example of a destructive process which is 
going on in most parts of the world. As, meantime, the 
population increases, a disastrous food shortage is 
inevitable within the next fifty years unless drastic steps 
are taken. The necessary measures are known to students 
of agriculture, but only governments can take them, and 
then only if they are willing and able to face unpopularity. 
This is a problem which has received far too little attention. 
It must be faced by anyone who hopes for a stable world 
without internecine wars— wars which, if they are to ease 
the food shortage, must be far more destructive than those 
we have already endured, for during both the world wars 
the population of the world increased. This question of a 
reform in agriculture is perhaps the most important that 
the governments of the near future will have to face, 
except the prevention of war. 

I have spoken of security, justice, and conservation as 
the most essential of governmental functions, because 
these are things that only governments can bring about. I 
have not meant to suggest that governments should have 
no other functions. But in the main their functions in other 
spheres should be to encourage non-governmental 
initiative, and to create opportunities for its exercise in 
beneficent ways. There are anarchic and criminal forms of 
initiative which cannot be tolerated in a civilised society. 
There are other forms of initiative, such as that of the well- 
established inventor, which everybody recognises to be 
useful. But there is a larger intermediate class of innovators 
of whose activities it cannot be known in advance whether 
the effects will be good or bad. It is particularly in relation 
to this uncertain class that it is necessary to urge the 
desirability of freedom to experiment, for this class 



72 CONTROL AND INITIATIVE: THEIR RESPECTIVE SPHERES 


includes all that has been best in the history of human 
achievement. 

Uniformity, which is a natural result of State control, is 
desirable in some things and undesirable in others. In 
Florence, in the days before Mussolini, there was one rule 
of the roads in the town and the opposite rule in the 
surrounding country. This kind of diversity was 
inconvenient, but there were many matters in which 
Fascism suppressed a desirable kind of diversity. In matters 
of opinion it is a good thing if there is vigorous discussion 
between different schools of thought. In the mental world 
there is everything to be said in favour of a struggle for 
existence, leading, with luck, to a survival of the fittest. But 
if there is to be mental competition, there must be ways of 
limiting the means to be employed. The decision should not 
be by war, or by assassination, or by imprisonment of 
those holding certain opinions, or by preventing those 
holding unpopular views from earning a living. Where 
private enterprise prevails, or where there are many small 
States, as in Renaissance Italy and eighteenth-century 
Germany, these conditions are to some extent fulfilled by 
rivalry between different possible patrons. But when, as has 
tended to happen throughout Europe, States become 
large and private fortunes small, traditional methods of 
securing intellectual diversity fail. The only method that 
remains available is for the State to hold the ring and 
establish some sort of Queensbury rules by which the 
contest is to be conducted. 

Artists and writers are nowadays almost the only people 
who may with luck exercise a powerful and important 
initiative as individuals, and not in connection with some 
group. While I lived in California, there were two men who 
set to work to inform the world as to the condition of 
migrant labour in that State. One, who was a novelist, dealt 
with the theme in a novel; the other, who was a teacher in a 
State university, dealt with it in a careful piece of academic 
research. The novelist made a fortune; the teacher was 
dismissed from his post, and suffered an imminent risk of 
destitution. 

But the initiative of the writer, though as yet it survives, 
is threatened in various ways. If book-production is in the 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 73 


hands of the State, as it is in Russia, the State can decide 
what shall be published, and, unless it delegates its power 
to some completely non-partisan authority, there is a 
likelihood that no books will appear except such as are 
pleasing to leading politicians. The same thing applies, of 
course, to newspapers. In this sphere, uniformity would be 
a disaster, but would be a very probable result of 
unrestricted State socialism. 

Men of science, as I pointed out in my third lecture, could 
formerly work in isolation, as writers still can; Cavendish 
and Faraday and Mendel depended hardly at all upon 
institutions, and Darwin only in so far as the government 
enabled him to share the voyage of the Beagle. But this 
isolation is a thing of the past. Most research requires 
expensive apparatus; some kinds require the financing of 
expeditions to difficult regions. Without facilities provided 
by a government or a university, few men can achieve much 
in modern science. The conditions which determine who is 
to have access to such facilities are therefore of great 
importance. If only those are eligible who are considered 
orthodox in current controversies, scentific progress will 
soon cease, and will give way to a scholastic reign of 
authority such as stifled science throughout the Middle 
Ages. 

In politics, the association of personal initiative with a 
group is obvious and essential. Usually two groups are 
involved: the party and the electorate. If you wish to carry 
some reform, you must first persuade your party to adopt 
the reform, and then persuade the electorate to adopt your 
party. You may, of course, be able to operate directly upon 
the Government, but this is seldom possible in a matter 
that rouses much public interest. When it is not possible, 
the initiative required involves so much energy and time, 
and is so likely to end in failure, that most people prefer to 
acquiesce in the status quo, except to the extent of voting, 
once in five years, for some candidate who promises 
reform. 

In a highly organised world, personal initiative connected 
with a group must be confined to a few unless the group is 
small. If you are a member of a small committee you may 
reasonably hope to influence its decisions. In national 



74 CONTROL AND INITIATIVE: THEIR RESPECTIVE SPHERES 


politics, where you are one of some twenty million voters, 
your influence is infinitesimal unless you are exceptional or 
occupy an exceptional position. You have, it is true, a 
twenty-millionth share in the government of others, but 
only a twenty-millionth share in the government of 
yourself. You are therefore much more conscious of being 
governed than of governing. The government becomes in 
your thoughts a remote and largely malevolent ‘they’, not a 
set of men whom you, in concert with others who share 
your opinions, have chosen to carry out your wishes. Your 
individual feeling about politics, in these circumstances, is 
not that intended to be brought about by democracy, but 
much more nearly what it would be under a dictatorship. 

The sense of bold adventure, and of capacity to bring 
about results that are felt to be important, can only be 
restored if power can be delegated to small groups in 
which the individual is not overwhelmed by mere numbers. 
A considerable degree of central control is indispensable, if 
only for the reasons that we considered at the beginning of 
this lecture. But to the utmost extent compatible with this 
requisite, there should be devolution of the powers of the 
State to various kinds of bodies— geographical, industrial, 
cultural, according to their functions. The powers of these 
bodies should be sufficient to make them interesting, and 
to cause energetic men to find satisfaction in influencing 
them. They would need, if they were to fulfil their purpose, 
a considerable measure of financial autonomy. Nothing is 
so damping and deadening to initiative as to have a 
carefully thought out scheme vetoed by a central authority 
which knows almost nothing about it and has no sympathy 
with its objects. Yet this is what constantly happens in 
Britain under our system of centralised control. Something 
more elastic and less rigid is needed if the best brains are 
not to be paralysed. And it must be an essential feature of 
any wholesome system that as much as possible of the 
power should be in the hands of men who are interested in 
the work that is to be done. 

The problem of delimiting the powers of various bodies 
will, of course, be one presenting many difficulties. The 
general principle should be to leave to smaller bodies all 
functions which do not prevent the larger bodies from 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 75 


fulfilling their purpose. Confining ourselves, for the 
moment, to geographical bodies, there should be a 
hierarchy from the world government to parish councils. 
The function of the world government is to prevent war, 
and it should have only such powers as are necessary to 
this end. This involves a monopoly of armed force, a power 
to sanction and revise treaties, and the right to give 
decisions in disputes between States. But the world 
government should not interfere with the internal affairs of 
member States, except in so far as is necessary to secure 
the observance of treaties. In like manner the 
national government should leave as much as possible to 
County Councils, and they in turn to Borough and Parish 
Councils. A short-run loss of efficiency may be expected in 
some respects, but if the functions of subordinate bodies 
are made sufficiently important able men will find 
satisfaction in belonging to them, and the temporary loss of 
efficiency will soon be more than made good. 

At present local government is too generally regarded as 
the hobby of the well-to-do and the retired, since as a rule 
only they have leisure to devote to it. Because they are 
unable to participate, few young and able men and women 
take much interest in the affairs of their local community. 
If this is to be remedied, local government must become a 
paid career, for the same reasons as have led to the 
payment of Members of Parliament. 

Whether an organisation is geographical or cultural or 
ideological, it will always have two sorts of relations, those 
to its own members, and those to the outside world. The 
relations of a body to its own members should, as a rule, 
be left to the free decision of the members, so long as 
there is no infringement of the law. Although the relations 
of a body to its members should be decided by the 
members, there are some principles which, if democracy is 
to have any reality, it is to be hoped that the members will 
bear in mind. Take, for example, a large business. The 
attack upon capitalism by Socialists has been concerned, 
perhaps too exclusively, with questions of income rather 
than with questions of power. When an industry is 
transferred to the State by nationalisation it may happen 
that there is still just as much inequality of power as there 



76 CONTROL AND INITIATIVE: THEIR RESPECTIVE SPHERES 


was in the days of private capitalism, the only change being 
that the holders of power are now officials, not owners. It 

is, of course, unavoidable that in any large organisation 
there should be executive officers who have more power 
than the rank and file, but it is very desirable that such 
inequality of power should be no greater than is 
absolutely necessary, and that as much initiative as 
possible should be distributed to all members of the 
organisation. In this connection a very interesting book is 
Mr John Spedan Lewis’s Partnership For All— A 34-year Old 
Experiment in Industrial Democracy. What makes the book 
interesting is that it is based upon a long and extensive 
practical experience by a man who combines public spirit 
with experimental boldness. On the financial side he has 
made all the workers in his enterprises partners who share 
in the profit, but, in addition to this financial innovation, he 
has taken pains to give to each employee a feeling that he 
shares actively in the government of the whole enterprise, 
though I doubt whether, by his methods, it is possible to 
go as far as we ought to go towards democracy in industry. 
He has also developed a technique for giving important 
posts to the men most capable of carrying on the work 
involved. It is interesting to observe that he has arguments 
against equality of remuneration, not only on the ground 
that those who do difficult work deserve better pay, but, on 
the converse ground, that better pay is a cause of better 
work. He says: ‘It is quite false to imagine that ability and 
the will to use it are both of them what mathematicians 
call, I believe, “constants" and that all that varies is the 
income that the worker happens to get in return. Not only 
your will to do your best but your actual ability depends 
very largely upon what you are paid. Not only are people 
highly paid because they are able; they are also able 
because they are highly paid.’ 

This principle has a wider application than Mr Lewis gives 

it, and it applies not only to pay but also to honour and 
status. I think, in fact, that the chief value of an increase of 
salary lies in increase of status. A scientific worker whose 
work is generally acclaimed as important will get the same 
stimulus from recognition as a man in another field might 
get from an increase of income. The important thing, in fact, 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 77 


is hopefulness and a certain kind of buoyancy, a thing in 
which Europe has become very deficient as a result of the 
two World Wars. Freedom of enterprise, in the old laissez- 
faire sense, is no longer to be advocated, but it is of the 
utmost importance that there should still be freedom of 
initiative, and that able men should find scope for their 
ability. 

This, however, is only one side of what is desirable in a 
large organisation. The other thing that is important is that 
those in control should not be possessed of too absolute a 
power over the others. For centuries reformers fought 
against the power of kings, and then they set to work to 
fight against the power of capitalists. Their victory in this 
second contest will be fruitless if it merely results in 
replacing the power of the capitalists by the power of the 
officials. Of course there are practical difficulties, because 
officials must often take decisions without waiting for the 
slow results of a democratic process, but there should 
always be possibilities, on the one hand, of deciding 
general lines of policy democratically, and, on the other 
hand, of criticising the actions of officials without fear of 
being penalised for so doing. Since it is natural to energetic 
men to love power, it may be assumed that officials in the 
great majority of cases will wish to have more power than 
they ought to have. There is, therefore, in every large 
organisation the same need of democratic watchfulness as 
there is in the political sphere. 

The relations of an organisation to the outside world are 
a different matter. They ought not to be decided merely on 
grounds of power, that is to say, on the bargaining 
strength of the organisation in question, but should be 
referred to a neutral authority whenever they cannot be 
settled by friendly negotiation. To this principle there 
should be no exception until we come to the world as a 
whole, which, so far, has no external political relations. If a 
Wellsian War of the Worlds were possible, we should need 
an Inter-Planetary Authority. 

Differences between nations, so long as they do not lead 
to hostility, are by no means to be deplored. Living for a 
time in a foreign country makes us aware of merits in 
which our own country is deficient, and this is true 



78 CONTROL AND INITIATIVE: THEIR RESPECTIVE SPHERES 


whichever country our own may be. The same thing holds 
of differences between different regions within one country, 
and of the differing types produced by different 
professions. Uniformity of character and uniformity of 
culture are to be regretted. Biological evolution has 
depended upon inborn differences between individuals or 
tribes, and cultural evolution depends upon acquired 
differences. When these disappear, there is no longer any 
material for selection. In the modern world, there is a real 
danger of too great similarity between one region and 
another in cultural respects. One of the best ways of 
minimising this evil is an increase in the autonomy of 
different groups. 

The general principle which, if I am right, should govern 
the respective spheres of authority and initiative, may be 
stated broadly in terms of the different kinds of impulses 
that make up human nature. On the one hand, we have 
impulses to hold what we possess, and (too often) to 
acquire what others possess. On the other hand, we have 
creative impulses, impulses to put something into the 
world which is not taken away from anybody else. These 
may take humble forms, such as cottage gardens, or may 
represent the summit of human achievement, as in 
Shakespeare and Newton. Broadly speaking, the 
regularising of possessive impulses and their control by the 
law belong to the essential functions of government, while 
the creative impulses, though governments may encourage 
them, should derive their main influence from individual or 
group autonomy. 

Material goods are more a matter of possession than 
goods that are mental. A man who eats a piece of food 
prevents everyone else from eating it, but a man who 
writes or enjoys a poem does not prevent another man 
from writing or enjoying one just as good or better. That is 
why, in regard to material goods, justice is important, but 
in regard to mental goods the thing that is needed is 
opportunity and an environment that makes hope of 
achievement seem rational. It is not great material rewards 
that stimulate men capable of creative work; few poets or 
men of science have made fortunes or wished to do so. 
Socrates was put to death by Authority, but he remained 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 79 


completely placid in his last moments because he had done 
his work. If he had been loaded with honours but prevented 
from doing his work, he would have felt that he had 
suffered a far severer penalty. In a monolithic State, where 
Authority controls all the means of publicity, a man of 
marked originality is likely to suffer this worse fate: whether 
or not he is subjected to legal penalties, he is unable to 
make his ideas known. When this happens in a community, 
it cannot any longer contribute anything of value to the 
collective life of mankind. 

The control of greedy or predatory impulses is 
imperatively necessary, and therefore States, and even a 
World State, are needed for survival. But we cannot be 
content merely to be alive rather than dead; we wish to live 
happily, vigorously, creatively. For this the State can 
provide a part of the necessary conditions, but only if it 
does not, in the pursuit of security, stifle the largely 
unregulated impulses which give life its savour and its 
value. The individual life still has its due place, and must 
not be subjected too completely to the control of vast 
organisations. To guard against this danger is very 
necessary in the world that modern technique has created. 



80 



Lecture 6 

Individual and Social Ethics 


In this last lecture I wish to do two things. First, to repeat 
briefly the conclusions reached in earlier lectures; second, 
to relate social and political doctrines to the individual 
ethics by which a man should guide his personal life, and 
after the evils we have recognised and the dangers that we 
have acknowledged, to hold out nevertheless, as resulting 
from our survey, certain high hopes for the not too distant 
future of mankind, which I, for my part, believe to be 
justified on a sober estimate of possibilities. 

To begin with recapitulation. Broadly speaking, we have 
distinguished two main purposes of social activities: on the 
one hand, security and justice require centralized 
governmental control, which must extend to the creation 
of a world government if it is to be effective. Progress, on 
the contrary, requires the utmost scope for personal 
initiative that is compatible with social order. 

The method of securing as much as possible of both 
these aims is devolution. The world government must leave 
national governments free in everything not involved in the 
prevention of war; national governments, in their turn, 
must leave as much scope as possible to local authorities. 
In industry, it must not be thought that all problems are 
solved when there is nationalisation. A large industry— e.g. 
railways— should have a large measure of self- 
government; the relation of employees to the State in a 
nationalised industry should not be a mere reproduction of 
their former relation to private employers. Everything 
concerned with opinion, such as newspapers, books, and 
political propaganda, must be left to genuine competition, 
and carefully safeguarded from governmental control, as 



82 INDIVIDUAL AND SOCIAL ETHICS 


well as from every other form of monopoly. But the 
competition must be cultural and intellectual, not 
economic, and still less military or by means of the 
criminal law. 

In cultural matters, diversity is a condition of progress. 
Bodies that have a certain independence of the State, such 
as universities and learned societies, have great value in 
this respect. It is deplorable to see, as in present-day 
Russia, men of science compelled to subscribe to 
obscurantist nonsense at the behest of scientifically 
ignorant politicians who are able and willing to enforce 
their ridiculous decisions by the use of economic and 
police power. Such pitiful spectacles can only be prevented 
by limiting the activities of politicians to the sphere in 
which they may be supposed competent. They should not 
presume to decide what is good music, or good biology, or 
good philosophy. I should not wish such matters to be 
decided in this country the personal taste of any Prime 
Minister, past, present, or future, even if, by good luck, his 
taste were impeccable. 

I come now to the question of personal ethics, as 
opposed to the question of social and political institutions. 
No man is wholly free, and no man is wholly a slave. To the 
extent to which a man has freedom, he needs a personal 
morality to guide his conduct. There are some who would 
say that a man need only obey the accepted moral code of 
his community. But I do not think any student of 
anthropology could be content with this answer. Such 
practices as cannibalism, human sacrifice, and head 
hunting have died out as a result of moral protests against 
conventional moral opinion. If a man seriously desires to 
live the best life that is open to him, he must learn to be 
critical of the tribal customs and tribal beliefs that are 
generally accepted among his neighbours. 

But in regard to departures, on conscientious grounds, 
from what is thought right by the society to which a man 
belongs, we must distinguish between the authority of 
custom and the authority of law. Very much stronger 
grounds are needed to justify an action which is illegal than 
to justify one which only contravenes conventional morality. 
The reason is that respect for law is an indispensable 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 83 


condition for the existence of any tolerable social order. 
When a man considers a certain law to be bad, he has a 
right, and may have a duty, to try to get it changed, but it 
is only in rare cases that he does right to break it. I do not 
deny that there are situations in which law-breaking 
becomes a duty: it is a duty when a man profoundly 
believes that it would be a sin to obey. This covers the case 
of the conscientious objector. Even if you are quite 
convinced that he is mistaken, you cannot say that he ought 
not to act as his conscience dictates. When legislators are 
wise, they avoid, as f ar as possible, framing laws in such a 
way as to compel conscientious men to choose between sin 
and what is legally a crime. 

I think it must also be admitted that there are cases in 
which revolution is justifiable. There are cases where the 
legal government is so bad that it is worth while to 
overthrow it by force inspite of the risk of anarchy that is 
involved. This risk is very real. It is noteworthy that the 
most successful revolutions— that of England in 1688 and 
that of America in 1 776 —were carried out by men who 
were deeply imbued with a respect for law. Where this is 
absent, revolution is apt to lead to either anarchy or 
dictatorship. Obedience to the law, therefore, though not 
an absolute principle, is one to which great weight must be 
attached, and to which exceptions should only be admitted 
in rare cases after mature consideration. 

We are led by such problems to a deep duality in ethics, 
which, however perplexing, demands recognition. 

Throughout recorded history, ethical beliefs have had 
two very different sources, one political the other 
concerned with personal religious and moral convictions. In 
the Old Testament the two appear quite separately, one as 
the Law, the other as the Prophets. In the Middle Ages 
there was the same kind of distinction between the official 
morality inculcated by the hierarchy and the personal 
holiness that was taught and practised by the great 
mystics. This duality of personal and civic morality, which 
still persists, is one of which any adequate ethical theory 
must take account. Without civic morality communities 
perish; without personal morality their survival has no 



84 INDIVIDUAL AND SOCIAL ETHICS 


value. Therefore civic and personal morality are equally 
necessary to a good world. 

Ethics is not concerned so/e/ywith duty to my neighbour, 
however rightly such duty may be conceived. The 
performance of public duty is not the whole of what makes 
a good life; there is also the pursuit of private excellence. 
For man, though partly social, is not wholly so. He has 
thoughts and feelings and impulses which may be wise or 
foolish, noble or base, filled with love or inspired by hate. 
And for the better among these thoughts and feelings and 
impulses, if his life is to be tolerable, there must be scope. 
For although few men can be happy in solitude, still fewer 
can be happy in a community which allows no freedom of 
individual action. 

Individual excellence, although a great part of it consists 
in right behaviour towards other people, has also another 
aspect. If you neglect your duties for the sake of trivial 
amusement, you will have pangs of conscience; but if you 
are tempted away for a time by great music or a fine 
sunset, you will return with no sense of shame and no 
feeling that you have been wasting your time. It is 
dangerous to allow politics and social duty to dominate too 
completely our conception of what constitutes individual 
excellence. What I am trying to convey, although it is not 
dependent upon any theological belief, is in close harmony 
with Christian ethics. Socrates and the Aposties laid it down 
that we ought to obey God rather than man, and the 
Gospels enjoin love of God as emphatically as love of our 
neighbours. All great religious leaders, and also all great 
artists and intellectual discoverers, have shown a sense of 
moral compulsion to fulfil their creative impulses, and a 
sense of moral exaltation when they have done so. This 
emotion is the basis of what the Gospels call duty to God, 
and is (I repeat) separable from theological belief. Duty to 
my neighbour, at any rate as my neighbour conceives it, 
may not be the whole of my duty. If I have a profound 
conscientious conviction that I ought to act in a way that is 
condemned by governmental authority, I ought to follow 
my conviction. And conversely, society ought to allow me 
freedom to follow my convictions except when there are 
very powerful reasons for restraining me. 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 85 


But it is not only acts inspired by a sense of duty that 
should be free from excessive social pressure. An artist or 
a scientific discoverer may be doing what is of most social 
utility, but he cannot do his proper work from a sense of 
duty alone. He must have a spontaneous impulse to paint 
or to discover, for, if not, his painting will be worthless and 
his discoveries unimportant. 

The sphere of individual action is not to be regarded as 
ethically inferior to that of social duty. On the contrary, 
some of the best of human activities are, at least in feeling, 
rather personal than social. As I said in Lecture III, 
prophets, mystics, poets, scientific discoverers, are men 
whose lives are dominated by a vision; they are essentially 
solitary men. When their dominant impulse is strong, they 
feel that they cannot obey authority if it runs counter to 
what they profoundly believe to be good. Although, on this 
account, they are often persecuted in their own day, they 
are apt to be, of all men, those to whom posterity pays the 
highest honour. It is such men who put into the world the 
things that we most value, not only in religion, in art, and 
in science, but also in our way of feeling towards our 
neighbour, for improvements in the sense of social 
obligation, as in everything else, have been largely due to 
solitary men whose thoughts and emotions were not 
subject to the dominion of the herd. 

If human life is not to become dusty and uninteresting it 
is important to realise that there are things that have a 
value which is quite independent of utility. What is useful 
because it is a means of something else, and the 
something else, if it is not in turn merely a means, must be 
valued for its own sake, for otherwise the usefulness is 
illusory. 

To strike the right balance between ends and means is 
both difficult and important. If you are concerned to 
emphasise means, you may point out that the difference 
between a civilised man and a savage, between an adult 
and a child, between a man and an animal, consists largely 
in a difference as to the weight attached to ends and 
means in conduct. A civilised man insures his life, a savage 
does not; an adult brushes his teeth to prevent decay, a 
child does not except under compulsion; men labour in the 


86 INDIVIDUAL AND SOCIAL ETHICS 


fields to provide food for the winter, animals do not. 
Forethought, which involves doing unpleasant things now 
for the sake of pleasant things in the future, is one of the 
most essential marks of mental development. Since 
forethought is difficult and requires control of impulse, 
moralists stress its necessity, and lay more stress on the 
virtue of present sacrifice than on the pleasantness of the 
subsequent reward. You must do right because it is right, 
and not because it is the way to get to heaven. You must 
save because all sensible people do, and not because you 
may ultimately secure an income that will enable you to 
enjoy life. And so on. 

But the man who wishes to emphasise ends rather than 
means may advance contrary arguments with equal truth. It 
is pathetic to see an elderly rich business man, who from 
work and worry in youth has become dyspeptic, so that he 
can eat only dry toast and drink only water while his 
careless guests feast; the joys of wealth, which he had 
anticipated throughout long laborious years, elude him, 
and his only pleasure is the use of financial power to 
compel his sons to submit in their turn to a similar futile 
drudgery. Misers, whose absorption in means is 
pathological, are generally recognised to be unwise, but 
minor forms of the same malady are apt to receive undue 
commendation. Without some consciousness of ends, life 
becomes dismal and colourless; ultimately the need for 
excitement too of ten finds a worse outlet than it would 
otherwise have done, in war or cruelty or intrigue or some 
other destructive activity. 

Men who boast of being what is called ‘practical’ are for 
the most part exclusively preoccupied with means. But 
theirs is only one-half of wisdom. When we take account of 
the other half, which is concerned with ends, the economic 
process and the whole of human life take on an entirely 
new aspect. We ask no longer: what have the producers 
produced, and what has consumption enabled the 
consumers in their turn to produce? We ask instead: what 
has there been in the lives of consumers and producers to 
make them glad to be alive? What have they felt or known 
or done that could justify their creation? Have they 
experienced the glory of new knowledge? Have they known 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 87 


love and friendship? Have they rejoined in sunshine and the 
spring and the smell of flowers? Have they felt the joy of 
life that simple communities express in dance and song? 
Once in Los Angeles I was taken to see the Mexican colony 
—idle vagabonds, I was told, but to me they seemed to be 
enjoying more of what makes life a boon and not a curse 
than fell to the lot of my anxious hard-working hosts. 
When I tried to explain this feeling, however, I was met with 
a blank and total lack of comprehension. 

People do not always remember that politics, economics, 
and social organisation generally, belong in the realm of 
means, not ends. Our political and social thinking is prone 
to what may be called the ‘administrator’s fallacy’, by 
which I mean the habit of looking upon a society as a 
systematic whole, of a sort that is thought good if it is 
pleasant to contemplate as a model of order, a planned 
organism with parts neatly dove-tailed into each other. But 
a society does not, or at least should not, exist to satisfy an 
external survey, but to bring a good life to the individuals 
who compose it. It is in the individuals, not in the whole, 
that ultimate value is to be sought A good society is a 
means to a good life for those who compose it, not 
something having a separate kind of excellence on its own 
account. 

When it is said that a nation is an organism, an analogy is 
being used which may be dangerous if its limitations are 
not recognised. Men and the higher animals are organisms 
in a strict sense: whatever good or evil befalls a man befalls 
him as a single person, not this or that part of him. If I have 
toothache, or a pain in my toe, it is I that have the pain, 
and it would not exist if no nerves connected the part 
concerned with my brain. But when a farmer in 
Herefordshire is caught in a blizzard, it is not the 
government in London that feels cold. That is why the 
individual man is the bearer of good and evil, and not, on 
the one hand, any separate part of a man, or on the other 
hand, any collection of men. To believe that there can be 
good and evil in a collection of human beings, over and 
above the good or evil in the various individuals, is an 
error; moreover, it is an error which leads straight to 
totalitarianism, and is therefore dangerous. 



88 INDIVIDUAL AND SOCIAL ETHICS 


There are some among philosophers and statesmen who 
think that the State can have an excellence of its own, and 
not merely as a means to the welfare of the citizens. I 
cannot see any reason to agree with this view. ‘The State’ is 
an abstraction; it does not feel pleasure or pain, it has no 
hopes or fears, and what we think of as its purposes are 
really the purposes of individuals who direct it. When we 
think concretely, not abstractly, we find, in place of ‘the 
State’, certain people who have more power than falls to 
the share of most men. And so glorification of ‘the State’ 
turns out to be, in fact, glorification of a governing 
minority. No democrat can tolerate such a fundamentally 
unjust theory. 

There is another ethical theory, which to my mind is also 
inadequate; it is that which might be called the ‘biological’ 
theory, though I should not wish to assert that it is held by 
biologists. This view is derived from a contemplation of 
evolution. The struggle for existence is supposed to have 
gradually led to more and more complex organisms, 
culminating (so far) in man. In this view, survival is the 
supreme end, or rather, survival of one’s own species. 
Whatever increases the human population of the globe, if 
this theory is right, is to count as ‘good’, and whatever 
diminishes the population is to count as ‘bad’. 

I cannot see any justification for such a mechanical and 
arithmetical outlook. It would be easy to find a single acre 
containing more ants than there are human beings in the 
whole world, but we do not on that account acknowledge 
the superior excellence of ants. And what human person 
would prefer a large population living in poverty and 
squalor to a smaller population living happily with a 
sufficiency of comfort? 

It is true, of course, that survival is the necessary 
condition for everything else, but it is only a condition of 
what has value, and may have no value on its own account. 
Survival, in the world that modern science and technique 
have produced, demands a great deal of government. But 
what is to give value to survival must come mainly from 
sources that lie outside government The reconciling of 
these two opposite requisites has been our problem in 
these discussions. 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 89 


And now, gathering up the threads of our discussions, 
and remembering all the dangers of our time, I wish to 
reiterate certain conclusions, and, more particularly, to set 
forth the hopes which I believe we have rational grounds for 
entertaining. 

Between those who care most for social cohesion and 
those who primarily value individual initiative there has 
been an age-long battle ever since the time of the ancient 
Greeks. In every such perennial controversy there is sure to 
be truth on both sides; there is not likely to be a clear-cut 
solution, but at best one involving various adjustments and 
compromises. 

Throughout history, as I suggested in my second lecture, 
there has been a fluctuation between periods of excessive 
anarchy and periods of too strict governmental control. In 
our day, except (as yet) in the matter of world government, 
there has been too much tendency towards authority, and 
too little care for the preservation of initiative. Men in 
control of vast organisations have tended to be too 
abstract in their outlook, to forget what actual human 
beings are like, and to try to fit men to systems rather than 
systems to men. 

The lack of spontaneity from which our highly organised 
societies tend to suffer is connected with excessive control 
over large areas by remote authorities. 

One of the advantages to be gained from decentralisation 
is that it provides new opportunities for hopefulness and 
for individual activities that embody hopes. If our political 
thoughts are all concerned with vast problems and dangers 
of world catastrophe, it is easy to become despairing. Fear 
of war, fear of revolution, fear of reaction, may obsess you 
according to your temperament and your party bias. Unless 
you are one of a very small number of powerful individuals, 
you are likely to feel that you cannot do much about these 
great issues. But in relation to smaller problems— those of 
your town, or your trade union, or the local branch of your 
political party, for example— you can hope to have a 
successful influence. This will engender a hopeful spirit, 
and a hopeful spirit is what is most needed if a way is to be 
found of dealing successfully with the larger problems. War 
and shortages and financial stringency have caused almost 



90 INDIVIDUAL AND SOCIAL ETHICS 


universal fatigue, and have made hopefulness seem shallow 
and insincere. Success, even if, at first, it is on a small 
scale, is the best cure for this mood of pessimistic 
weariness. And success, for most people, means breaking 
up our problems, and being free to concentrate on those 
that are not too desperately large. 

The world has become the victim of dogmatic political 
creeds, of which, in our day, the most powerful are 
capitalism and communism. I do not believe that either, in 
a dogmatic and unmitigated form, offers a cure for 
preventible evils. Capitalism gives opportunity of initiative 
to a few; communism could (though it does not in fact) 
provide a servile kind of security for all. But if people can 
rid themselves of the influence of unduly simple theories 
and the strife that they engender, it will be possible, by a 
wise use of scientific technique, to provide both 
opportunity for all and security for all. Unfortunately our 
political theories are less intelligent than our science, and 
we have not yet learnt how to make use of our knowledge 
and our skill in the ways that will do most to make life 
happy and even glorious. It is not only the experience and 
the fear of war that oppresses mankind, though this is 
perhaps the greatest of all the evils of our time. We are 
oppressed also by the great impersonal forces that govern 
our daily life, making us still slaves of circumstance though 
no longer slaves in law. This need not be the case. It has 
come about through the worship of false gods. Energetic 
men have worshipped power rather than simple happiness 
and friendliness; men of less energy have acquiesced, or 
have been deceived by a wrong diagnosis of the sources of 
sorrow. 

Ever since mankind invented slavery, the powerful have 
believed that their happiness could be achieved by means 
that involved inflicting misery on others. Gradually, with 
the growth of democracy, and with the quite modern 
application of Christian ethics to politics and economics, a 
better ideal than that of the slave-holders has begun to 
prevail, and the claims of justice are now acknowledged as 
they never were at any former time. But in seeking justice 
by means of elaborate systems we have been in danger of 
forgetting that justice alone is not enough. Daily joys, 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 91 


times of liberation from care, adventure, and opportunity 
for creative activities, are at least as important as justice in 
bringing about a life that men can feel to be worth living. 
Monotony may be more deadening than an alternation of 
delight and agony. The men who think out administrative 
reforms and schemes of social amelioration are for the 
most part earnest men who are no longer young. Too often 
they have forgotten that to most people not only 
spontaneity but some kind of personal pride is necessary 
for happiness. The pride of a great conqueror is not one 
that a well-regulated world can allow, but the pride of the 
artist, of the discoverer, of the man who has turned a 
wilderness into a garden or has brought happiness where, 
but for him, there would have been misery— such pride is 
good, and our social system should make it possible, not 
only for the few, but for very many. 

The instincts that long ago prompted the hunting and 
fighting activities of our savage ancestors demand an 
outlet; if they can find no other, they will turn to hatred and 
thwarted malice. But there are outlets for these very 
instincts that are not evil. For fighting it is possible to 
substitute emulation and active sport; for hunting, the joy 
of adventure and discovery and creation. We must not 
ignore these instincts, and we need not regret them; they 
are the source, not only of what is bad, but of what is best 
in human achievement. When security has been achieved, 
the most important task for those who seek human welfare 
will be to find for these ancient and powerful instincts 
neither merely restraints nor the outlets that make for 
destruction, but as many as possible of the outlets that 
give joy and pride and splendour to human life. 

Throughout the ages of human development men have 
been subject to miseries of two kinds: those imposed by 
external nature, and those that human beings misguidedly 
inflicted upon each other. At first, by far the worst evils 
were those that were due to the environment. Man was a 
rare species, whose survival was precarious. Without the 
agility of the monkey, without any coating of fur, he had 
difficulty in escaping from wild beasts, and in most parts of 
the world could not endure the winter’s cold. He had only 
two biological advantages: the upright posture freed his 



92 INDIVIDUAL AND SOCIAL ETHICS 


hands, and intelligence enabled him to transmit experience. 
Gradually these two advantages gave him supremacy. The 
numbers of the human species increased beyond those of 
any other large mammals. But nature could still assert her 
power by means of flood and famine and pestilence, and by 
exacting from the great majority of mankind incessant toil 
in the securing of daily bread. 

In our own day our bondage to external nature is fast 
diminishing, as a result of the growth of scientific 
intelligence. Famines and pestilences still occur, but we 
know better, year by year, what should be done to prevent 
them. Hard work is still necessary, but only because we are 
unwise: given peace and co-operation, we could subsist on 
a very moderate amount of toil. With existing techniques, 
we can, whenever we choose to exercise wisdom, be free of 
many ancient forms of bondage to external nature. 

But the evils that men inflict upon each other have not 
diminished in the same degree. There are still wars, 
oppressions, and hideous cruelties, and greedy men still 
snatch wealth from those who are less skilful or less 
ruthless than themselves. Love of power still leads to vast 
tyrannies, or to mere obstruction when its grosser forms 
are impossible. And fear— deep, scarcely conscious fear— is 
still the dominant motive in very many lives. 

All this is unnecessary; there is nothing in human nature 
that makes these evils inevitable. I wish to repeat, with all 
possible emphasis, that I disagree completely with those 
who infer from our combative impulses that human nature 
demands war and other destructive forms of conflict. I 
firmly believe the very opposite of this. I maintain that 
combative impulses have an essential part to play, and in 
their harmful forms can be enormously lessened. 

Greed of possession will grow less where there is no fear 
of destitution. Love of power can be satisfied in many ways 
that involve no injury to others: by the power over nature 
that results from discovery and invention, by the 
production of admired books or works of art, and by 
successful persuasion. Energy and the wish to be effective 
are beneficient if they can find the right outlet, and 
harmful if not— like steam, which can either drive the train 
or burst the boiler. 



AUTHORITY AND THE INDIVIDUAL 93 


Our emancipation from bondage to external nature has 
made possible a greater degree of human well-being than 
has ever hitherto existed. But if this possibility is to be 
realised, there must be freedom of initiative in all ways not 
positively harmful, and encouragement of those forms of 
initiative that enrich the life of Man. We shall not create a 
good world by trying to make men tame and timid, but by 
encouraging them to be bold and adventurous and fearless 
except in inflicting injuries upon their fellow-men. In the 
world in which we find ourselves, the possibilities of good 
are almost limitless, and the possibilities of evil no less so. 
Our present predicament is due more than anything else to 
the f act that we have learnt to understand and control to a 
terrifying extent the forces of nature outside us, but not 
those that are embodied in ourselves. Self-control has 
always been a watchword of the moralists, but in the past 
it has been a control without understanding. In these 
lectures I have sought for a wider understanding of human 
needs than is assumed by most politicians and economists, 
for it is only through such an understanding that we can 
find our way to the realisation of those hopes which, 
though as yet they are largely frustrated by our folly, our 
skill has placed within our reach. 



