



Er> xj c AT I oisr 

yvi>ax> THE 

SOCIAL ORDER 



By the same Author 


THE ANALYSIS OF HIND 
Third Impression 

INTRODUCTION TO MATHEMATICAL PHILOSOPHY 
Second Impression 

OUR KNOWLEDGE OF THE EXTERNAL WORLD 
Second Edition 

AN OUTLINE OF PHILOSOPHY 

SCEPTICAL ESSAYS 
Second Impression 

THE SCIENTIFIC OUTLOOK 

PRINCIPLES OF SOCIAL RECONSTRUCTION 
Ninth Impression 

ROADS TO FREEDOM 
SOCIALISM, ANARCHISM, SYNDICALISM 
Third Edition^ Seventh Impression 

JUSTICE IN WAR-TIME 

FREE THOUGHT AND OFFICIAL PROPAGANDA 

MARRIAGE AND MORALS 
Fourth Impression 

THE CONQUEST OF HAPPINESS 
Fourth Impression 

ON EDUCATION : ESPECIALLY IN EARLY CHILDHOOD 
Third Impression 

WITH DORA RUSSELL 
THE PROSPECTS OF INDUSTRIAL CIVILIZATION 
Third Impression 

WITH SCOTT NEARING 
BOLSHEVISM AND THE WEST 



EDUCATION 

AND THE 

SOCIAL ORDER 

by 

BERTRAND RUSSELL 


LONDON 

GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD 
MUSEUM STREET 



FIRST PUBLISHED IN I932 

The American edition appears under the title ” Education and the 
Modern World** with chapters II & III and IV V run 

together 


All rights reserved 

PRINTED IN GREAT BRITAIN BY 
UNWIN BROTHERS LTD., WOKING 



CONTENTS 


CHAPTER PAGE 

I, THE INDIVIDUAL VERSUS THE CITIZEN 9 

n. THE NEGATIVE THEORY OF EDUCATION SQ 

m. EDUCATION AND HEREDITY 45 

IV. EMOTION AND DISCIPLINE 56 

V. HOME VERSUS SCHOOL 65 

VI. ARISTOCRATS, DEMOCRATS, AND BUREAUCRATS 76 

VII. THE HERD IN EDUCATION 88 

VIII. RELIGION IN EDUCATION lOI 

IX. SEX IN EDUCATION II7 

X. PATRIOTISM IN EDUCATION I3I 

XI. CLASS-FEEUNG IN EDUCATION 1 45 

XII. COMPETITION IN EDUCATION 160 

XIII. EDUCATION UNDER COMMUNISM 1 78 

XIV. EDUCATION AND ECONOMICS 1 96 

XV. PROPAGANDA IN EDUCATION 213 

XVI. THE RECONCILIATION OF INDIVIDUALITY AND 

CITIZENSHIP 232 




Education and the Social Order 


CHAPTER I 

THE INDIVIDUAL VERSUS THE CITIZEN 

That education is desirable is the opinion of all 
modern civilized States, but is, nevertheless, a pro- 
position which has at all times been disputed by 
some men whose judgement commands respect. 
Those who oppose education do so on the ground 
that it cannot achieve its professed objects. Before 
we can adequately examine their opinion, we must, 
therefore, decide what it is that we should wish 
education to accomplish if possible: on this ques- 
tion there are as many divergent views as there are 
conceptions of human welfare. But there is one 
great temperamental cleavage which goes deeper 
than any of the other controversies, and that is the 
cleavage between those who consider education 
primarily in relation to the individual psyche, and 
those who consider it in relation to the community. 

Assuming (as will be argued in the next chapter) 
that education should do something to afford a 
training and not merely to prevent impediments to 
growth, the question arises whether education 
should train good individuals or good citizens. It 
may be said, and it would be said By any person of 

9 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

Hegelian tendencies, that there can be no antithesis 
between the good citizen and the good individual. 
The good individual is he who ministers to the good 
of the whole, and the good of the whole is a pattern 
made up of the goods of individuals. As an ultimate 
metaphysical truth I am not prepared either to 
combat or to support this thesis, but in practical 
daily life the education which results from regarding 
a child as an individual is very different from that 
which results from regarding him as a future citizen. 
The cultivation of the individual mind is not, on the 
face of it, the same thing as the production of a 
useful citizen. Goethe, for example, was a less useful 
citizen than James Watt, but as an individual must 
be reckoned superior. There is such a thing as the 
good of the individual as distinct from a little frac- 
tion of the good of the community. Different people 
have different conceptions of what constitutes the 
good of the individual, and I have no wish to argue 
with those who take a view different from my own. 
But whatever view may be taken, it is difficult to 
deny that the cultivation of the individual and the 
training of the citizen are different things. 

What constitutes the good of the individual? I 
will try to give my own answer without in any way 
suggesting that others should agree with me. 

First and foremost, the individual, like Leibniz’s 
monads, should mirror the world. Why? I cannot 
say why, except that knowledge and comprehen- 
siveness appear to me glorious attributes, in virtue 


lO 



^ THE INDIVIDUAL VERSUS THE CITIZEN 

of which I prefer Newton to an oyster. The man who 
holds concentrated and sparkling within his own 
mind, as within a camera obscura, the depths of space, 
the evolution of the sun and planets, the geological 
ages of the earth, and the brief history of humanity, 
appears to me to be doing what is distinctively 
human and what adds most to the diversified spec- 
tacle of nature. I would not abate this view even if 
it should prove, as much of modern physics seems 
to suggest, that the depths of space and the “dark 
backward and abysm of time” were only coeffi- 
cients in the mathematician’s equations. For in that 
case man becomes even more remarkable as the 
inventor of the starry heavens and the ages of 
cosmic antiquity: what he loses in knowledge he 
gains in imagination. 

But while the cognitive part of man is the basis 
of his excellence, it is far from being the whole of it. 
It is not enough to mirror the world. It should be 
mirrored with emotion: a specific emotion appro- 
priate to the object, and a general joy in the mere 
act of knowing. But knowing and feeling together 
are still not enough for the complete human being. 
In this world of flux men bear their part as causes 
of change, and in the consciousness of themselves as 
causes they exercise will and become aware of 
power. Knowledge, emotion, and power, all these 
should be widened to the utmost in seeking the 
perfection of the human being. ToyrCr, Wisdom, and 
Love, according to traditional theology, are the 


II 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

respective attributes of the Three Persons of the 
Trinity, and in this respect at any rate man made 
God in his own image. 

In this we are thinking of man as an individual. 
We are considering him as he has been considered 
by Buddhists, Stoics, Christian saints, and all 
mystics. The elements of knowledge and emotion in 
the perfect individual as we have been portraying 
him are not essentially social. It is only through the 
will and through the exercise of power that the 
individual whom we have been imagining becomes 
an effective member of the community. And even 
so the only place which the will, as such, can give 
to a man is that of dictator. The will of the individual 
considered in isolation is the god-like will which 
says “let such things be.” The attitude of the citizen 
is a very different one. He is aware that his will is 
not the only one in the world, and he is concerned, 
in one way or another, to bring harmony out of the 
conflicting wills that exist within his community. 
The individual as such is self-subsistent, while the 
citizen is essentially circumscribed by his neighbours. 
With the exception of Robinson Crusoe we are of 
course all in fact citizens, and education must take 
account of this fact. But it may be held that we 
shall ultimately be better citizens if we are first 
aware of all our potentialities as individuals before 
we descend to the compromises and practical 
acquiescences of the political life. The fundamental 
characteristic of the citizen is that he co-operates, in 


13 



THE INDIVIDUAL VERSUS THE CITIZEN 

intention if not in fact. Now the man who wishes to 
co-operate, unless he is one of exceptional powers, 
will look about for some ready-made purpose with 
which to co-operate. Only a man of very exceptional 
greatness can conceive in solitude a purpose in 
which it would be well for men to co-operate, and 
having conceived it can persuade men to follow him. 
There have been such men. Pythagoras thought it 
well to study geometry, for which every schoolboy 
to this day has reason to curse him. But this solitary 
and creative form of citizenship is rare, and is not 
likely to be produced by an education designed for 
the training of citizens. Citizens as conceived by 
governments are persons who admire the status quo 
and are prepared to exert themselves for its pre- 
servation. Oddly enough, while all governments 
aim at producing men of this type to the exclusion 
of all other types, their heroes in the past are of 
exactly the sort that they aim at preventing in the 
present. Americans admire George Washington and 
Jefferson, but imprison those who share their poli- 
tical opinions. The EngUsh admire Boadicea, whom 
they would treat exactly as the Romans did if she 
were to appear in modern India. All the Western 
nations admire Christ, who would certainly be 
suspect to Scotland Yard if He lived now, and would 
be refused American citizenship on account of His 
unwillingness to bear arms. This illustrates the ways 
in which citizenship as an ideal is inadequate, for as 
an ideal it involves an absence of creativeness, and 

13 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

a willingness to acquiesce in the powers that be, 
whether oligarchic or democratic, which is contrary 
to what is characteristic of the greatest men, and 
tends, if over-emphasized, to prevent ordinary men 
from attaining the greatness of which they are 
capable. J 

I do not mean to be understood as an advocate of 
rebellion. Rebellion in itself is no better than 
acquiescence in itself, since it is equally determined 
by relation to what is outside ourselves rather than 
by a purely personal judgement of value. Whether 
rebellion is to be praised or deprecated depends 
upon that against which a person rebels, but there 
should be the possibility of rebellion on occasion, and 
not only a blind acquiescence produced by a rigid 
education in conformity. And what is perhaps more 
important than either rebellion or acquiescence, 
there should be the capacity to strike out a wholly 
new line, as was done by Pythagoras when he 
invented the study of geometry. 

■ ^The issue between citizenship and individuality 
is important in education, in politics, in ethics, and 
in metaphysics. In education it has a comparatively 
simple practical aspect, which can be to some 
degree considered apart from the theoretical issue. 
The education of the young of a whole community 
is an expensive business, which, in the main, is 
bound to fall to the lot of the State. The only other 
organization sufficiently interested in forming the 
minds of the young to have any really important 



THE INDIVIDUAL VERSUS THE CITIZEN 

share in education is the Church. The purpose of 
the State is, of course, to train citizens. For certain 
historical reasons, this purpose is as yet considerably 
mitigated by tradition. In the Middle Ages educa- 
tion meant the education of the priest. From the 
Renaissance until recent times it meant the educa- 
tion of a gentleman. Under the influence of snobbish 
democracy, it has come to mean an education 
which makes a man seem like a gentleman. Many 
thin gs of little utility to the citizen as such are 
taught in schools, with a view to making the scholars 
genteel. Other elements in education remain from 
the ecclesiastical tradition of the Middle Ages, of 
which the purpose was to enable a man to appre- 
hend the ways of God. Gentility and godliness are 
attributes of the individual rather than of the citizen. 
The Christian religion as a whole is a religion of the 
individual, owing to the fact that it arose among 
men destitute of political power. It is concerned 
primarily with the relation of the soul to God ; and 
while it considers the relation of a man to his 
neighbour, it considers it as resulting from the 
man’s own emotions, not from laws and social 
institutions. 

The political element in Christianity, as it exists 
at the present day, came in with Constantine. 
Before his day it was the Christian’s duty to disobey 
the State, while since his day it has, as a rule and in 
the main, been the Christian’s duty to obey the 
State. The anarchic origin of Christianity has, how- 

*5 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

ever, left a leaven which has led, throughout its 
history, to revivals of the primitive attitude of 
disobedience. The Cathari, the Albigenses, the 
Spiritual Franciscans, all in their various ways 
rejected authority in favour of the inner light. 
Protestantism began in a revolt against authority, 
and has never found any logical justification for 
such exercise of theological jurisdiction as it has 
been inclined to claim after it had acquired control 
of the government. Consequently, Protestantism has 
been driven by an inner logic to the acceptance of 
religious toleration, a view which Catholicism has 
never adopted in theory, and has only accepted in 
practice for reasons of temporary convenience. In 
this, Catholicism represents the tradition of the 
Roman Emperor, while Protestantism has reverted 
to the individualism of the Apostles and the Early 
Fathers. 

Religions may be divided into those that are 
political and those that concern the individual soul. 
Confucianism is a political religion: Confucius, as 
he wandered from court to court, became concerned 
essentially with the problem of government, and 
with the instilling of such virtues as to make good 
government easy. Buddhism, on the contrary, in 
spite of the fact that in its early days it was the 
religion of princes, is essentially non-political. I do 
not mean that it has always remained so. In Tibet 
it is as political as the papacy, and in Japan I have 
met high Buddhist dignitaries who reminded me of 

i6 



I THE INDIVIDUAL VERSUS THE CITIZEN 

English archdeacons. Nevertheless, the Buddhist, in 
his more religious moments, considers himself essen- 
tially as a solitary being. Islam, on the contrary, was 
from its very beginning a political religion. Mahomet 
made himself a ruler of men, and the caliphs who 
succeeded him remained so until the conclusion of 
the Great War. It is typical of the difference between 
Islam and Christianity that the caliph combined 
within himself both temporal and spiritual authority, 
which to a Mahometan are not distinct; whereas 
Christianity, by its non-political character, was led 
to create two rival politicians, namely, the Pope 
and the Emperor, of whom the former based his 
claims to temporal power upon the unimportance of 
secular rule. Communism, as it has developed in 
Russia, is a political religion analogous to Islam, It 
is, however, unavoidably influenced by Byzantine 
tradition; and there is a possibility that the Com- 
munist party may take the place of the Church, 
leaving the secular government to that degree of 
independence of ecclesiastical authority which it 
possessed before the Revolution. In this, as in other 
matters, Russia is divided between an Eastern and 
a Western mentality. In so far as Russia is Asiatic, 
the Communist party takes the place of the caliphate ; 
while in so far as Russia is European, the Com- 
munist party takes the place of the Church. 

The purpose of this bird’s-eye view of the history 
of religions has been to suggest that the elements in 
current education which are concerned with indi- 


B 


»7 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

vidual culture are, in the main, products of tradi- 
tion, and are likely to be more and more replaced 
by education in citizenship. Education in citizen- 
ship, if it is wise, can retain what was best in indi- 
vidual culture. But if it is in any way short-sighted, 
it will stunt the individual in order to make him 
a convenient tool of government. It is therefore 
important to realize the dangers inherent in the 
ideals of citizenship when narrowly conceived. 
Those who institute State systems of education will 
cause men to deteriorate, even as citizens, if they 
take a narrow view of what constitutes a good 
citizen. Only men of wide individual culture are 
capable of appreciating what individual culture has 
to contribute to citizenship. Unfortunately, in the 
present day, such men tend to be replaced more 
and more by men of executive ability, or by mere 
politicians who must be rewarded for their services. 

An education of which the purpose is to make 
good citizens has two very different forms, according 
as it is directed to the support or to the overthrow of 
the existing system. It might be supposed, in view of 
the importance of the State in education, that 
education would be almost always directed to the 
support of the status quo. This, however, is not the 
case. Except in Russia, the influence of religion and 
of the middle class is sufficiently strong to cause a 
very large part of education to remain reactionary 
wherever Socialists have acquired power. On the 
other hand, before the French Revolution, and 

i8 k/ 



THE INDIVIDUAL VERSUS THE CITIZEN 

again before the Russian Revolution, education, 
while not widespread, was in the main anti-govern- 
mental. In the more backward parts of the United 
States at the present day there is a similar ten- 
dency. State Universities tend to teach, more or less 
unintentionally, doctrines which are repugnant to 
the ignorant farmers who pay the taxes on which 
the Universities live. The farmers, not unnaturally, 
think that those who pay the piper should' call the 
tune, but when they cannot understand the piper, 
or know what tune he is playing, they find this 
a Httle difficult. But in spite of these exceptions, 
education in the modern world tends to be a reac- 
tionary force, supporting the government when it is 
conservative, and opposing it when it is progressive. 
Unfortunately, also, the elements of good citizen- 
ship which are emphasized in schools and Univer- 
sities are the worst elements and not the best. What 
is emphasized most of all is patriotism in a somewhat 
miUtant form : that is to say, a narrow devotion to 
the persons living in a certain area, as opposed to 
those living elsewhere, and willingness to further 
the interests of the persons in the chosen area by the 
use of military force. With regard to internal affairs, 
citizenship, as generally taught, perpetuates tradi- 
tional injustices. The great majority of well-to-do 
young men, for example, felt patriotic during the 
General Strike when they acted as blacklegs. 
Hardly any of them had been so educated as to be 
able to conceive the case in favour of the strikers. 


*9 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

Wherever an injustice exists, it is possible to invoke 
the ideal of legality and constitutionality in its 
support. Educators in every country except Russia 
tend to be constitutionally timid, and, either by 
their income or by their snobbery, to be adherents 
of the rich. On both grounds their teaching tends to 
over-emphasize the importance of the law and the 
constitution, although these give the past a para- 
lysing hold over the present. By reaction against 
this over-emphasis, those who desire any radical 
improvement in the world are compelled to be 
revolutionary, and the revolutionary’s conception of 
duty to the community is liable to be just as narrow, 
and in the long run just as dangerous, as that of the 
advocate of law and order. 

There are, however, certain respects in which the 
advocate of change is likely to give better education 
than the advocate of the status quo. Animal habit is 
sufficient by itself to make a man like the old ways, 
just as it makes a horse like to turn down a road 
which it usually turns down. None of the higher 
mental processes are required for conservatism. The 
advocate of change, on the contrary, must have a 
certain degree of imagination in order to be able to 
conceive of anything different from what exists. He 
must also have some power of judging the present 
from the standpoint of values, and, since he cannot 
well be unaware that the status quo has its advocates, 
he must realize that there are at least two views 
which are possible for a sane human being. More- 
80 



THE INDIVIDUAL VERSUS THE CITIZEN 

over, he is not obliged to close his sympathies 
against the victims of existing cruelties, or to invent 
elaborate reasons to prove that easily preventable 
sufferings ought not to be prevented. Both intel- 
ligence and sympathy, therefore, tend to be less 
repressed by an education hostile to the status quo 
than by one which is friendly to it. 

To this, however, there are certain limitations. 
Hostility to the status qua may be derived fr6m either 
of two sources : it may spring from sympathy with 
the unfortunate or from hatred of the fortunate. If 
it springs from the latter, it involves just as much 
limitation of sympathy as is involved in conserva- 
tism. Many revolutionaries in their day-dreams are 
not so much concerned with the happiness that is 
to come to the common people as with the ven- 
geance that they will be able to wreak upon the 
insolent holders of power from whom they are 
suffering in the present. On the intellectual side, 
again, there is a tendency for advocates of change 
to organize themselves into groups, welded together 
by a narrow orthodoxy, hating heresy, and viewing 
it as moral treachery in favour of prosperous sinners. 
Orthodoxy is the grave of intelligence, no matter 
what orthodoxy it may be. And in this respect the 
orthodoxy of the radical is no better than that of 
the reactionary. 

One of the most important ways in which indi- 
vidual culture conflicts with the education of the 
citizen, narrowly conceived, is in respect of the 


31 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

scientific attitude towards doubtful questions. 
Science has developed a certain technique, which 
is essentially a technique of discovery, that is to 
say, of change. The scientific frame of mind is, 
broadly speaking, that which facilitates discovery, 
not that which causes a man to have an unwavering 
belief in the present tenets of science. A well- 
educated citizen is likely to be incapable of dis- 
covery, since he will respect his elders and betters, 
reverence the great men of the past generation, and 
look with horror upon all subversive doctrines. The 
modern State, which is built upon science, is there- 
fore in a difficulty. Some States prefer unorthodox 
people who invent new explosives, others prefer that 
their young men should be orthodox, and should 
carry on the great traditions of the past. The Byzan- 
tines, when they could have purchased the help of 
the West by a few theological concessions, chose 
instead to preserve their orthodoxy, and suffered 
defeat at the hands of the Turk. Similarly, the 
British Admiralty, when faced with the terrible 
alternative of either listening to subversive young 
men or becoming obsolete through admiration of 
Nelson, prefers the latter alternative, whatever 
sufferings may be entailed by its reverence for the 
great traditions of our ancestors. So at least it is 
said by those who should know. 

It is one of the contradictions of our time that 
science, which is the source of power, and more 
particularly of governmental power, depends for 



TOE INDIVIDUAL VERSUS TOE CITIZEN 


its advancement upon an essentially anarchic state 
of mind in the investigator. The scientific state of 
mind is neither sceptical nor dogmatic. The sceptic 
holds that the truth is undiscoverable, while the 
dogmatist holds that it is already discovered. The 
man of science holds that the truth is discoverable 
though not discovered, at any rate in the matters 
which he is investigating. But even to say that the 
truth is discoverable is to say rather more than the 
genuine man of science believes, since he does not 
conceive his discoveries as final and absolute, but 
as approximations subject to future correction. 
Absence of finality is of the essence of the scientific 
spirit. The beliefs of the man of science are there- 
fore tentative and undogmatic. But in so far as 
they result from his own researches, they are per- 
sonal, not social. They depend, that is to say, upon 
what he himself has ascertained by observation 
and inference, not upon what society considers it 
prudent for the good citizen to believe. This con- 
flict between the scientific spirit and the govern- 
mental use of science is likely ultimately to bring 
scientific progress to a standstill, since scientific 
technique will be increasingly used to instil ortho- 
doxy and credulity. If this is not to happen, it will 
be necessary that boys showing a certain degree of 
aptitude for science shall be exempted from the 
usual training in citizenship, and given a licence to 
think. Persons reaching a certain level in examina- 
tions will be allowed to place after their names the 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

letters L.T., meaning “Licensed to Think.” Such 
persons shall thereafter never be disqualified from 
any post on the ground that they think their superiors 
fools. 

Speaking more seriously, the whole conception of 
truth is one which is difficult to reconcile with the 
usual ideals of citizenship. It may, of course, be 
said, as is said by pragmatists, that the conception 
of truth in its traditional form has no validity, and 
that the truth is only what it is convenient to believe. 
If this be the case, truth can be determined by Act 
of Parliament. Leigh Hunt found it to be incon- 
venient to believe that the Prince Regent was fat, 
since this opinion caused him to be incarcerated. It 
follows that the Prince Regent was thin. It is diffi- 
cult in such a case as this to accept the pragmatist’s 
philosophy. One can hardly resist the conviction 
that there is something objectively and absolutely 
true about the proposition that the Prince Regent 
was fat. I can, of course, imagine a large number of 
arguments designed to escape from this conclusion. 
The word “fat” is a relative term. I remember that 
when the late Master of Christ’s, by no means a 
small man, found himself at dinner between two of 
the most eminent writers of our time, he remarked 
that he was having the unusual experience of 
feeling thin. Compared to some prize pigs the Prince 
Regent may have been thin. Therefore, in order to 
make Leigh Hunt’s statement accurate, it would be 
necessary to say that the Prince Regent belonged to 



THE INDIVIDUAL VERSUS THE CITIZEN 

the fattest one per cent, of adult males, or some 
such statement as that. It would be possible to say : 
“the ratio of the Prince Regent’s weight to His 
Highness’s height exceeds that of all but one per 
cent, of His Majesty’s adult male subjects.” This 
statement might, of course, be on the margin of 
doubt, but if so it could be made quite certainly 
correct by substituting two per cent, for one per 
cent. It cannot be seriously maintained that such a 
proposition is true because it is convenient to believe 
it, or becomes false through the fact that it is criminal 
to utter it. I have chosen an instance from a time 
more than a hundred years since, and one which 
no longer arouses political passion. But analogous 
matters of fact are at the present day of interest to 
governments, and there are still many propositions 
which no person of scientific mind can deny, but 
which no person who wishes to keep out of jail will 
utter. All the governments of the world adopt 
elaborate methods of concealing truths which they 
consider undesirable, and inflict various forms of 
penalty upon those who spread knowledge which 
is thought bad for the population. This applies 
especially to knowledge of the kind which is con- 
sidered seditious, and the kind which is considered 
obscene. I shall not give instances, since, if I did, I 
should myself fall under the ban of the law. 

For the reasons which we have been consider- 
ing, education in citizenship has grave dangers. 
Nevertheless, the argument in favour of some 

25 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

education designed to produce social cohesion is 
overwhelming. 

The amenities of civilized life depend upon co- 
operation, and every increase in industrialism 
demands an increase in co-operation. China, for 
example, has all the requisites for prosperity and 
high culture, except the existence of a strong cen- 
tralized government. Latin America, ever since it 
emancipated itself from Spain and Portugal, has 
been kept backward by the anarchic tendencies of 
its inhabitants. There is some evidence that the 
United States is preparing to follow the example of 
Latin America. Certainly the greatest danger from 
which the United States suffers at the present time 
is the absence of any vivid sense of citizenship on the 
part of a large proportion of its inhabitants. This 
cannot be attributed to any failure to emphasize 
citizenship in education ; on the contrary, the whole 
educational machine in America, from the public 
schools to the Universities, is concerned to emphasize 
citizenship, and to impress its duties upon the 
youthful mind. In spite of this educational effort, 
the average American, owing either to the pioneer- 
ing tradition or to the fact that his recent ancestors 
were Europeans, does not have that instinctive 
sense of the community which exists in the older 
countries of Europe. And unless he acquires it there 
is a danger that the whole industrial system may 
break down. 

Apart from national cohesion within the State, 

26 



THE INDIVIDUAL VERSUS THE CITIZEN 

which is all that State education attempts to achieve 
at present, international cohesion, and a sense of the 
whole human race as one co-operative unit, is be- 
coming increasingly necessary if our scientific civili- 
zation is to survive. I think this survival will demand, 
as a minimum condition, the establishment of a 
world State and the subsequent institution of a 
world-wide system of education designed to produce 
loyalty to the world State. No doubt such a system 
of education will entail, at any rate for a century or 
two, certain crudities which will militate against the 
development of the individual. But if the alternative 
is chaos and the death of civilization, the price will 
be worth paying. Modern communities are more 
closely knit than those of past times in their eco- 
nomic and political structure ; and if they are to be 
successful there must be a corresponding increase in 
the sense of citizenship on the part of individual 
men and women. Loyalty to a world State would 
not, of course, entail the worst feature of loyalty to 
one of the existing States, namely, the encourage- 
ment of war. But it might entail considerable 
curtailment of the intellectual and of the aesthetic 
impulses. I think, nevertheless, that the most vital 
need of the near future will be the cultivation of a 
vivid sense of citizenship of the world. When once 
the world as a single economic and political unit 
has become secure, it will be possible for individual 
culture to revive. But until that time our whole 
civilization remains in jeopardy. Considered sub 

27 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

Specie aeternitatis, the education of the individual is to 
my mind a finer thing than the education of the 
citizen ; but considered politically, in relation to the 
needs of the time, the education of the citizen must, 
I fear, take the first place. 


28 



CHAPTER II 


THE NEGATIVE THEORY OF EDUCATION 

Three divergent theories of education all have their 
advocates in the present day. Of these the first 
considers that the sole purpose of education is to 
provide opportunities of growth and to remove 
hampering influences. The second holds that the 
purpose of education is to give culture to the in- 
dividual and to develop his capacities to the utmost. 
The third holds that education is to be considered 
rather in relation to the community than in relation 
to the individual, and that its business is to train 
useful citizens. Of these theories the first is the 
newest while the third is the oldest. The second and 
third theories, which we considered in the preceding 
chapter, have in common the view that education 
can give something positive, while the first regards 
its function as purely negative. No actual education 
proceeds wholly and completely on any one of the 
three theories. All three in varying proportions are 
found in every system that actually exists. It is, I 
think, fairly clear that no one of the three is adequate 
by itself, and that the choice of a right system of 
education depends in great measure upon the adop- 
tion of a due proportion between the three theories. 
For my part, while I think that there is more truth 
in the first theory, which we may caU the negative 

39 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

view of education, I do not think that it contains 
by any means the whole truth. The negative view 
has dominated much progressive thinking on edu- 
cation. It is part of the general creed of liberty 
which has inspired liberal thought since the time 
of Rousseau. Oddly enough, political liberalism has 
been connected with the belief in compulsory edu- 
cation, while the belief in freedom in education 
exists in great measure among Socialists, and even 
Communists. Nevertheless, this belief is ideologically 
connected with liberalism, and has the same degree 
of truth and falsehood that belongs to the concep- 
tion of liberty in other spheres. 

Until very recent times hardly anybody questioned 
the view that it is the business of education to train 
the child in the way he should go. He was to be 
taught moral mzixims, habits of industry, and a 
stock of knowledge proportional to his social station. 
The methods by which this was to be achieved were 
rough and ready, in fact not unlike those employed 
in the training of horses. What the whip was to do 
to the horse the rod was to do to the child. It can- 
not be denied that this system, for all its crudity, 
produced on the whole the results at which it aimed. 
It was only a minority that suffered education, but 
in that minority certain habits had been formed — 
habits of self-discipline and social conformity, of 
capacity for command, and of harshness that took 
no account of human needs. Men trained under 
Dr. Keate and similar pedagogues made our Eng- 
30 



THE NEGATIVE THEORY OF EDUCATION 

land what it is, and extended the blessings of our 
civilization to the benighted heathen in India and 
Africa, I do not wish to belittle this achievement, 
and I am not sure that it would have been possible 
by any other method with the same economy of 
effort. Its products, owing to a certain Spartan 
toughness and to a complete incapacity for intel- 
lectual doubt, acquired the qualities needed by an 
imperial race among backward peoples. They were 
able to pass on the stern rule to which they had 
been subjected in youth, and to avoid the realiza- 
tion that what they supposed to be their education 
had starved the intelligence and the emotions in 
order to strengthen the will. In America a similar 
result was achieved by Puritanism while it remained 
vigorous. 

The Romantic Movement was essentially a protest 
in the name of the emotions against the previous 
undue emphasis upon the will. The Romantic Move- 
ment achieved something as regards the treatment 
of very young children, but in the main the edu- 
cational authorities were too firmly entrenched and 
too much habituated to command to be appreciably 
affected by the softer ideals of the Romantics. It 
is only in our own day that their general outlook 
upon Ufe has begun to produce any reaUy wide- 
spread effect upon educational theory, but just as 
laisser Jam in economics has had to give way to 
new forms of ordered planning, so in education 
laisser faire, while it is a necessary stage, is not, I 

3 * 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

think, the last word. I propose in this chapter to 
state the case in its favour, and then to examine 
its limitations. 

The case for the greatest possible freedom in 
education is a very strong one. To begin with, 
absence of freedom involves conflicts with adults, 
which frequently have a much more profound 
psychological effect than was realized until very 
recently. The child who is in any way coerced 
tends to respond with hatred, and if, as is usual, 
he is not able to give free vent to his hatred, it 
festers inwardly, and may sink into the unconscious 
with all kinds of strange consequences throughout 
the rest of life. The father as the object of hatred 
may come to be replaced by the State, the Church, 
or a foreign nation, thus leading a man to become 
an anarchist, an atheist, or a mihtarist as the case 
may be. Or again, hatred of the authorities who 
oppress the child may become transferred into a 
desire to inflict equal oppression later on upon the 
next generation. Or there may be merely a general 
moroseness, making pleasant social and personal 
relations impossible. I found one day in school a 
boy of medium size ill-treating a smaller boy. I 
expostulated, but he replied: “The bigs hit me, 
so I hit the babies ; that’s fair.” In these words he 
epitomized the history of the human race. 

Another effect of compukion in education is that 
it destroys originality and intellectual interest. Desire 
for knowledge, at any rate for a good deal of know- 

38 



THE NEGATIVE THEORY OF EDUCATION 

ledge, is natural to the young, but is generally 
destroyed by the fact that they are given more than 
they desire or can assimilate. Children who are 
forced to eat acquire a loathing for food, and chil- 
dren who are forced to learn acquire a loathing for 
knowledge. When they think, they do not think 
spontaneously in the way in which they run or 
jump or shout : they think with a view to pleasing 
some adult, and therefore with an attempt at cor- 
rectness rather than from natural curiosity. The 
killing of spontaneity is especially disastrous in 
artistic directions. Children who are taught litera- 
ture or painting or music to excess, or with a view 
to correctness rather than to self-expression, become 
progressively less interested in the aesthetic side of 
life. Even a boy’s interest in mechanical devices 
can be killed by too much instruction. If you teach 
a boy the principle of the common pump in lesson- 
time, he will try to avoid acquiring the knowledge 
you are trying to impart, whereas if you have a 
pump in your back yard and forbid him to touch 
it he will spend all his leisure studying it. A great 
many of these troubles are avoided by making 
lessons voluntary. There is no longer friction be- 
tween teacher and pupil, and in a fairly large 
proportion of cases the pupils consider the know- 
ledge imparted by the teacher worth having. Their 
initiative is not destroyed, because it is by their own 
choice that they learn, and they do not accumulate 
masses of undigested hate to lie festering in the 

33 


o 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

unconscious throughout the rest of life. The argu- 
ments for free speech, for freedom from politeness, 
and for freedom in regard to sex knowledge are 
even stronger, but I shall consider these matters 
separately at a later stage. 

For all these reasons, reforming educators tend, 
and I think tend rightly, towards greater and 
greater freedom in the school. I do not think, 
however, that freedom in school can be erected 
into an absolute principle. It has its limitations, 
and it is important to realize what they are. 

As one of the most obvious examples we may take 
cleanliness. I should like to say to begin with that 
most children of well-to-do parents are kept a great 
deal too clean. Parents excuse their behaviour on 
the ground that cleanliness is hygienic, but the 
motive for making it excessive is one of snobbery. 
If you see two children, one of whom is clean and 
the other is dirty, you tend to suppose that the clean 
one’s parents have a larger income than the parents 
of the dirty one. Consequently snobs try to keep 
their children very clean. This is an abominable 
tyranny which interferes with the children doing 
a great many of the things they had better be doing. 
From the point of view of health it is well that the 
children should be clean twice a day, when they 
get up in the morning and when they go to bed 
at night. Between these two painful moments they 
should be grubbing about exploring the world, 
especially its grimier portions, ruining their clothes 

34 



THE NEGATIVE THEORY OF EDUCATION 

and wiping muddy hands on their faces. To deprive 
children of these pleasures is to lessen their initia- 
tive, their impulse towards exploration, and their 
acquisition of useful muscular habits. But although 
dirt is such an admirable thing, cleanliness also has 
its place in the morning and evening, as we said 
before, and even this limited place it will not secure 
in a child’s life except through a good deal of coer- 
cion. If we wore no clothes and lived in a hot 
climate, we should get all the cleanliness that would 
be necessary through splashing in the water to keep 
cool. No doubt pithecanthropus erectus managed in 
this way, but we who wear clothes and live in 
temperate climates have not as much instinct to- 
wards cleanliness as health requires, and we there- 
fore have to be taught to wash. The same thing 
applies to brushing teeth. If we ate our food raw like 
our remote ancestors, we should not need to brush 
our teeth, but so long as we retain the unnatural 
habit of cooking we have to balance it by another 
unnatural habit, namely the tooth-brush. The “back- 
to-nature” cult, if it is to be compatible with health, 
must be thoroughgoing, and must involve the 
abandonment of clothes and cooking. If we are not 
prepared to go to these lengths we must teach our 
children certain habits which they will not acquire for 
themselves. In the matter of cleanliness and hygiene, 
therefore, although present conventional education 
involves much too great a limitation of freedom, yet 
some limitation is necessary in the interests of health. 

35 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

Another rather humble virtue which is not likely 
to be produced by a wholly free education is punc- 
tuality. Punctuality is a quality the need of which 
is bound up with social co-operation. It has nothing 
to do with the relation of the soul to God, or with 
mystic insight, or with any of the matters with 
which the more elevated and spiritual moralists are 
concerned. One would be surprised to find a saint 
getting drunk, but one would not be surprised to 
find him late for an engagement. And yet in the 
ordinary business of life punctuality is absolutely 
necessary. It would not do for the engine-driver or 
the postman to wait till the spirit moved him to 
drive his engine or collect the letters. All economic 
organizations of any complexity would become un- 
workable if those concerned were often late. But 
habits of punctuality are hardly likely to be learned 
in a free atmosphere. They cannot exist in a man 
who allows his moods to dominate him. For this 
reason they are perhaps incompatible with the 
highest forms of achievement. Newton, as we know, 
was so unpunctual at his meals that his dog ate 
them without Newton’s ever finding it out. The 
highest achievement in most directions demands 
capacity for absorption in a mood, but those whose 
work is less skilled, from royalty downward, do 
much harm if they are habitually unpunctual. It 
seems unavoidable, therefore, that young people 
should be subjected to the necessity of doing certain 
things at certain times if they are to be fitted to 
36 



THE NEGATIVE THEORY OF EDUCATION 

take any ordinary part in modern life. Those who 
show extraordinary talent, as poets or composers or 
pure mathematicians, may be exempted, but 99 per 
cent, of mankind need a discipline in observing 
time which is quite impossible if they are allowed 
to grow freely as their natural impulses dictate. 
The noble savage, one presumes, went hunting 
when he was hungry, and not at 8.53 a.m. like his 
descendant in the suburbs. The education of the 
noble savage, therefore, does not supply all that the 
dweller in the suburbs requires. 

A rather more serious matter, to which similar 
considerations apply, is honesty. I do not mean 
this term in any fancy sense ; I mean merely respect 
for the property of others. This is not a natural 
characteristic of human beings. The undisciplined 
human being appropriates the property of others 
whenever he considers it safe to do so. Perhaps even 
the disciplined human being does this not infre- 
quently, but discipline has taught him that theft is 
often not safe when at first sight it seems so. There 
is, I think, in the minds of some humane moderns 
a certain confusion of thought on this subject. 
Having discovered that there is such a thing as 
kleptomania, they are inclined to regard all thiev- 
ing as kleptomania. But this is quite a mistake. 
Kleptomania consists of stealing things, which often 
the thief does not really want, in circumstances 
where he is pretty sure to be caught. It has as a 
rule some psychological source: the kleptomaniac, 

37 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

unconsciously to himself, is stealing love, or objects 
having some sexual significance. Kleptomania can- 
not be dealt with by punishment, but only by 
psychological understanding. Ordinary thieving, 
however, is by no means irrational, and just be- 
cause it is rational it can be prevented by being 
made contrary to self-interest through social penal- 
ties. In a community of children whom their elders 
leave free, the thief, unless he is the biggest of the 
group, will be severely punished by the others. The 
elders may wash their hands of the punishment and 
say that in their system there is no penal code, but 
in this they are guilty of self-deception. The chances 
are that the penal code spontaneously created by 
a group of children will be more severe and more 
unreliable than one invented by adults. For the 
sake of the thief himself, therefore, it is on the whole 
wise that adults should take cognizance of acts of 
theft, and deal with them in a manner which pre- 
vents the other children from wreaking vengeance 
on their own account. An adequate respect for the 
property of others is hardly possible except through 
the creation of a conditioned reflex. Under the 
influence of temptation the chance of detection 
always appears less than it is, and the person to 
whom thieving is an active possibility is hardly 
likely to go through life without yielding to the 
temptation sufficiently often to be caught in the 
end. 

Another respect in which, to my mind, many 
38 



THE NEGATIVE THEORY OF EDUCATION 

apostles of freedom go astray, is that they fail to 
recognize sufficiently the importance of routine in 
the life of the young. I do not mean that a routine 
should be rigid and absolute : there should be days 
when it is varied, such as Christmas Day and 
holidays. But even these variations should, on the 
whole, be expected by the child. A life of uncer- 
tainty is nervously exhausting at all times, but 
especially in youth. The child derives a sense of 
security from knowing more or less what is going 
to happen day by day. He wishes his world to be 
safe, and subject to the reign of law. Our belief in 
the uniformity of nature is largely the projection 
upon the cosmos of the child’s desire for routine 
in the nursery. Adventurousness and courage are 
highly desirable qualities, but they are most easily 
developed against a background of fundamental 
security. 

A further point in favour of a large element of 
routine is that children find it both tiring and boring 
to have to choose their own occupation at all odd 
times. They prefer that at many times the initiative 
should not be theirs, and that their own choice 
should be confined within a framework imposed 
by friendly adults. Children, like grown-ups, enjoy 
the sense of achievement derived from mastering 
a difficulty, but this requires a consistency of effort 
of which few are capable without some outside 
encouragement. The capacity for consistent self- 
direction is one of the most valuable that a human 


39 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

being can possess. It is practically unknown in 
young children, and is never developed either by 
a very rigid discipline or by complete freedom. 
Very rigid discipline, such as that of soldiers in 
war-time, makes a man incapable of acting without 
the goad of external command. On the other hand, 
complete freedom throughout childhood does not 
teach him to resist the solicitations of a momentary 
impulse : he does not acquire the capacity of con- 
centrating upon one matter when he is interested 
in another, or of resisting pleasures because they 
will cause fatigue that will interfere with subsequent 
work. The strengthening of the will demands, 
therefore, a somewhat subtle mixture of freedom 
and discipline, and is destroyed by an excess of 
either. 

What is important as imposing limitations upon 
the desirable amount of discipline is that all train- 
ing should have the co-operation of the child’s will, 
though not of every passing impulse. Every child 
who is surrounded by friendly adults is conscious 
at bottom that he himself is rather foolish, and is 
grateful for a fair amount of guidance from those 
whom he can trust to be really concerned with his 
good, and not only with their own convenience or 
power. Athletes submit themselves to discipline as 
a matter of course, and young people whose desire 
for intellectual achievement is as great as the 
athlete’s desire for success in his field will be equally 
ready to submit themselves to the necessary discipline. 

40 



THE NEGATIVE THEORY OF EDUCATION 

But in an atmosphere where all discipline is thought 
evil, it will not occur to young people that voluntary 
submission of this sort is an essential of almost every 
kind of success. Difficult success as an ideal should 
be present to the mind of the young if they are not 
to become wayward and futile. But there are few 
to whom it will occur in an environment where 
freedom is absolute. 

The use of authority as opposed to persuasion 
can be reduced almost to nothing where the right 
sort of adult is in charge of not too large a number 
of children. Take, for example, such a matter as 
kindliness. I do not think that precept or punish- 
ment can do anything to produce a kindly dis- 
position, though it can restrain overt acts of cruelty. 
A kindly disposition requires, on the one hand, 
instinctive happiness, and on the other hand the 
example of kindly behaviour on the part of adults. 
The mere teaching of kindliness as a moral prin- 
ciple is, to my mind, almost useless. 

It is of the highest importance that whatever 
discipline may exist should not involve more than 
a minimum of emotional restraint, for a child who 
feels himself thwarted in any important way is 
liable to develop various undesirable characteristics 
the nature of which will depend upon his strength 
of character. If he is strong, he will become an 
angry rebel, while if he is weak he will become 
a whining hypocrite. Discipline, therefore, while it 
cannot be entirely absent, should be reduced as 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

much as is compatible with the training of decent 
and competent human beings. 

The matter of instruction is the crux of the whole 
question. Experience has persuaded me, somewhat 
to my surprise, that it is possible to give adequate 
instruction, and to produce highly educated human 
beings, without imposing any obligation to be 
present at lessons. To do this requires a combina- 
tion of circumstances which is not at present pos- 
sible on a large scale. It requires among adults a 
genuine and spontaneous interest in intellectual 
pursuits. It requires small classes. It requires sym- 
pathy and tact and skill in the teacher. And it 
requires an environment in which it is possible to 
turn a child out of a class and tell him to go and 
play, if he wishes to be in class solely for the pur- 
pose of creating a disturbance. It will be a long 
time before these conditions can be realized in 
ordinary schools, and therefore, for the present, 
compulsory attendance in class is likely to be neces- 
sary in the great majority of cases. 

There are some who argue that if a child is left 
alone he will teach himself to read and write and 
so forth from a wish not to be inferior to his neigh- 
bours, and that therefore absence of compulsion 
causes at most a delay of a year or two in the 
acquisition of knowledge. I think that this position 
is unconsciously parasitic. In a world where every 
other child learns to read and write, it is probable 
that any given child will in time wish to escape the 
4 « 



THE NEGATIVE THEORY OF EDUCATION 

sense of inferiority which would be produced by 
ignorance. But in a world where all children es- 
caped compulsion, there would soon be no occasion 
for this sense of inferiority, and each generation 
would be somewhat more ignorant than its pre- 
decessor. Very few children have a spontaneous 
impulse to learn the multiplication table. While 
their neighbours are compelled to learn it, they 
may, for very shame, feel that they ought to learn 
it too, but in a community where no child was 
obliged to learn it there would, before long, be 
only a few erudite pedants who would know what 
six times nine is. 

The acquisition of concrete knowledge is pleasant 
to most children: if they live on a farm they will 
watch the farmer’s operations and get to know all 
about them. But abstract knowledge is loved by 
very few, and yet it is abstract knowledge that 
makes a civilized community possible. Preservation 
of a civilized community demands, therefore, some 
method of causing children to behave in a manner 
which is not natural to them. It may be possible 
to substitute coaxing for compulsion, but it is not 
possible to leave the matter to the unaided opera- 
tion of nature. The idea of education as merely 
affording opportunities for natural growth is not, 
I think, one which can be upheld by a person who 
realizes the complexity of modern societies. Jt is, 
of course, possible to say that this complexity is 
regrettable, and that it would be better to return 

43 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

to a simpler way of life, but unfortunately the 
process of so returning would involve the death 
by starvation of a very large percentage of the 
population. This alternative is so horrible that we 
are practically committed to the whole complex 
apparatus of the modern industrial world, and being 
so committed, we are also bound to fit our children 
to take their part in carrying it on. The negative 
theory of education, therefore, while it has many 
important elements of truth, and is largely valid 
so far as the emotions are concerned, cannot be 
accepted in its entirety as regards intellectual and 
technical training. Where these are concerned, 
something more positive is required. 


44 



CHAPTER III 


EDUCATION AND HEREDITY 

The character of an adult plant or animal results 
from the interaction of the environment and the 
organism from the moment of fertilization onwards. 
I have tried to make this statement as colourless 
and uncontroversial as possible, because everything 
more definite is matter of controversy. The pro- 
portion of heredity and environment in forming 
an adult human character is very differently esti- 
mated by different authorities. Among men of 
science there is a natural tendency for heredity 
to be emphasized by geneticists, while environment 
is emphasized by psychologists. There is, however, 
another line of cleavage on this question, not scien- 
tific, but political. Conservatives and imperialists 
lay stress on heredity because they belong to the 
white race but are rather uneducated. Radicals 
lay stress on education because it is potentially 
democratic, and because it gives a reason for ignor- 
ing difference of colour. This political cleavage on 
the whole overrides that of geneticist and psycho- 
logist. Hogben, though a geneticist, finds little to 
be said in favour of eugenics, while governmental 
psychologists, such as Goddard and Terman, Jend 
to emphasize heredity. Americans of this school 
always^tacitly assume the superiority of the Nordics, 

45 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

though even the most conservative among them are 
constrained to admit that the mountaineers of North 
Carolina and Kentucky, who are of pure English 
and Scottish descent, none the less have, on the 
average, lower intelligence quotients than are found 
among Jewish immigrants. 

Where there is so large a margin of controversy, 
let us first of all establish some indubitable limiting 
points. Even the most ardent believers in education 
do not deny that the children of human beings are 
human, and are more educable than animals; nor 
do they question such obvious facts as that the 
children of white people are white, while the child- 
ren of black people are black. Per contra, the 
devotees of heredity do not deny that a promising 
child may be ruined by encephalitis lethargica, or that 
it is bad for a child’s intelUgence to give it opium 
from infancy, as many ignorant mothers do. Such 
points of agreement do not, however, take us very 
far. 

When the question is considered scientifically a 
difficulty arises through the fact that parents, who 
transmit the hereditary elements, are usually also 
a very important part of the environment. Simi- 
larities of behaviour between parents and children 
are as likely to be due to imitation ais to heredity. 
For this reason, children in orphan asylums should 
afford good material, but unfortunately the infor- 
mation available concerning their parents is apt 
to be very fragmentary. Studies of identical twins 
46 



EDUCATION AND HEREDITY 

have been made with a view to showing the strength 
of congenital elements,* but unfortunately identical 
twins usually have a close similarity in their en- 
vironment. It is to be hoped that some scientific 
millionaire will found a trust for separating identical 
twins at birth, and bringing them up in widely 
differing circumstances. I do not believe that if 
a Queen gave birth to identical twins, one of whom 
was brought up in the Palace, and the other in 
a slum, their mental similarity at the age of twenty 
would be very close ; but in the absence of experi- 
ment I must admit that my opinion is scarcely 
scientific. It was formerly believed that there was 
a princely mode of behaviour which depended on 
royal blood. Herodotus relates that Cyrus, after 
being brought up as a peasant from birth to the 
age of twelve, was recognized by his grandfather 
on account of his kingly bearing. I doubt, however, 
whether even the most extreme believers in Nordic 
superiority would regard this story as plausible. 

The powers of education have been exaggerated 
just as much as the powers of heredity. Dr. John 
B. Watson apparently believes that any child, by 
a suitable education, can be turned into a Mozart 
or a Newton; unfortunately, however, he has not 
yet told us what sort of education this should be. 
In his belief in the omnipotence of education he 
is by no means an innovator. Take, for exarnyple, 
Godwin, the author of Political Justice and the father- 

* See Lange, Crime as Destit^, translated by Mrs. J. B. S. Haldane. 

47 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

While it is dangerous to trust to unscientific im- 
pressions, I think some weight must be allowed to 
the experience of practical educators, none of whom, 
so far as I have been able to discover, have any 
doubt that there are differences of native ability 
among their pupils. It is admittedly difficult, if not 
impossible, to determine what is due to heredity 
and what to environment; but that some part of 
the difference of intelligence between one adult and 
another is congenital is, in my opinion, nearly 
certain. 

There is, however, both in Godwin and in Dr. 
John B. Watson, an argument by which they pro- 
fess to prove their thesis. The argument is that 
human beings do not have instincts, and that 
therefore the mind of a child has no character 
independent of experience. One might retort to 
Dr. Watson by an argument from authority ; Pavlov 
asserts that his dogs exhibit the four kinds of tem- 
perament enumerated by Hippocrates, and suffer 
from different types of nervous disorder according 
to the kind to which they belong. Dr. Watson might, 
however, reply that these differences of tempera- 
ment may have been caused by circumstances of 
which Pavlov was not aware, and that all dogs are 
born equal. We must, therefore, meet his theoretical 
argument. 

Let it be granted, for the sake of argument, that 
unconditioned reflexes (which have replaced in- 
stincts) are the same in all new-born infants. Does 
50 



EDUCATION AND HEREDITY 

it follow that there can be no congenital mental 
differences? Surely not. Take the learning of con- 
ditioned reflexes : some will learn more quickly than 
others, some will learn more effectively to discrimi- 
nate between stimuli that only differ slightly. Even 
if we grant that all education consists in the for- 
mation of conditioned reflexes, which is a disput- 
able proposition, it still does not follow that all 
children are equally educable. The position of the 
extreme advocates of education as against heredity 
has, therefore, no better foundation in theory than 
in practical observation. 

But although the importance of congenital dif- 
ferences among human beings cannot be denied, 
the practical inferences drawn by eugenists are for 
the most part quite unscientific. No one knows what 
factors making for socially desirable quaUties are 
hereditary, nor which of such factors are respec- 
tively dominant and recessive. There is not even 
any agreement as to what is socially desirable. 
From a very limited observation I am inclined 
to think that there is some correlation between 
excellence in pictorial art and incompetence in 
arithmetic. Assuming this to be the case, what 
should the eugenist do about it? Should he pro- 
duce a race of painters who cannot do accounts, 
or a race of accountants who are indifferent to art? 
The recognized intelligence tests are not without 
value in their own province, but they do nothing 
to test either moral or artistic qualities. Neither the 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

ethical nor the scientific foundations are sufficiently 
secure for any practical eugenic measures, except, 
possibly, the sterilization of the feeble-minded. The 
following assumptions are unwarranted : 

That negroes are congenitally inferior to white 
men; 

That persons born in Asia are inferior to those 
born in Europe or America ; 

That Europeans born north of latitude 45° are 
congenitally superior to those born south of that 
latitude ; 

That persons whose fathers have above ,^1,000 
a year are a better stock than those whose fathers 
have less. 

All these propositions are believed by most 
eugenists, and the first three have influenced the 
immigration laws of the United States. 

If the subject of the inheritance of ability is to 
be treated scientifically, there will be need of a 
great deal of preliminary work. There will be, first 
of all, the need of discovering measurable mental 
qualities which do not depend upon education. 
The intelligence tests are intended to do this, but 
they only do it, at best, within a homogeneous 
social milieu. There are questions about money, 
for example, which will be answered more readily 
by urban than by rural children. There are ques- 
tions demanding rhymes to certain words, which 
will be easier for children educated in poetry than 
for others. As soon as the intelligence tests are 
5a 



EDUCATION AND HEREDITY 

applied to the comparison of children with widely 
differing backgrounds, they become quite mislead- 
ing ; yet it is by just such applications that many 
believers in heredity as against environment obtain 
their results. 

So long as children live with their parents, it is 
impossible to separate hereditary and educational 
factors in any mental similarity which may exist. 
If the whole population were subjected to intelli- 
gence tests, valuable material would, in time, be 
obtainable from orphan asylums. If it were found 
that, in a given asylum, there was a correlation 
between the intelligence of children and that of their 
parents, that would be good evidence of heredity. 
But at present such evidence is still to be sought. 

In seeking laws of mental heredity, the quality 
selected should be simple, definite, and mezisurable. 
One might, for example, utter a sentence, prefer- 
ably nonsensical, and demand that the child should 
repeat it. The number of words in the longest 
sentence that a child could repeat correctly would 
measure a mental quality, though not necessarily 
a very desirable one. Macaulay, as every one knows, 
possessed this quality to an almost incredible degree ; 
but unfortunately there is no evidence as to whether 
his father or mother possessed it. If all school child- 
ren were tested in this respect on each birthday 
throughout their school years, we might, within 
forty years, acquire material of considerable value 
as regards mental heredity. 


53 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

Such statistical methods, however, will never 
satisfy the Mendelian, who wishes to isolate the 
particular gene or group of genes concerned in any 
instance of heredity. Mental qualities are so com- 
plex that this seems, for a long time to come, a 
hopeless task. It is possible, however, that some 
mental qualities may be more capable of isolation 
than are most of the others. Mathematical and 
musical ability both suggest themselves as suitable 
in this respect. Both are statistically rare, but, where 
they exist, are liable to be enormously in excess of 
the average. Both tend to run in families, but it 
is impossible to know how far this is due to educa- 
tion. Mozart, for example, had a musical father, 
but his father transmitted musical instruction as 
well as musical ability. So far as I know, no great 
musical or mathematical genius has ever come out 
of an orphan asylum, so that this method of testing 
heredity fails us. 

The work of Galton and his followers, designed 
to prove that ability is inherited, is far from scien- 
tifically convincing, although it is probable that 
there is some truth in their thesis. But until ways 
have been devised for eliminating the effect of the 
parental environment, the whole subject must re- 
main open to doubt. 

The outcome of the matter, from the standpoint 
of the practical educator, is simple. It is to be 
expected that there will be differences of ability 
among pupils, which are not traceable to the in- 

54 



EDUCATION AND HEREDITY 

fluence of environment; whatever native talent is 
discovered should be cultivated, and, if really re- 
markable, should be allowed, from an early age, 
to take up time which would otherwise be given 
to general education. But nothing whatever should 
be presumed either for or against the intelligence 
of a pupil or group of pupils on account of the 
race or social status or personal achievements of 
their parents. There is room for investigation as to 
the inheritance of ability, and it is easy to devise 
methods by which the matter could be studied 
scientifically; but if such methods were adopted it 
would necessarily be at least a generation before 
they could bear fruit, and in the meantime the only 
scientifically sound position is to confess our ignor- 
ance as to the distribution of native ability and 
the laws of its inheritance. 


55 



CHAPTER IV 


EMOTION AND DISCIPLINE 

Education has at all times had a twofold aim, 
namely instruction and training in good conduct. 
The conception of good conduct varies with the 
political institutions and social traditions of the 
community. In the middle ages, when there was a 
hierarchical organization proceeding from the serf 
by gradual stages up to God, the chief virtue was 
obedience. Children were taught to obey their 
parents and to reverence their social superiors, to 
feel awe in the presence of the priest and submission 
in the presence of the Lord of the Manor. Only the 
Emperor and the Pope were free, and, since the 
morality of the time afforded no guidance to free 
men, they spent their time in fighting each other. 
The moderns differ from the men of the thirteenth 
century both in aim and in method. Democracy has 
substituted co-operation for submission and herd- 
instinct for reverence ; the group in regard to which 
herd-instinct is to be most operative has become the 
nation, which was formerly rendered unimportant 
by the universality of the Church. Meanwhile propa- 
ganda has become persuasive rather than forceful, 
and has learnt to proceed by the instilling of suitable 
sentiments in early youth. Church music, school 
songs, and the flag determine, by their influence on 
56 



EMOTION AND DISCIPLINE 

the boy, the subsequent actions of the man in 
moments of strong emotion, Agaiinst these influences 
the assaults of reason have but little power. 

The influence of political conceptions on early 
education is not always obvious, and is often un- 
conscious on the part of the educator. For the 
present, therefore, I wish to consider education in 
behaviour with as little regard as possible to the 
social order, to which I shall return at a later stage. 
When it is sought to produce a certain kind of 
behaviour in a child or animal, there are two 
different techniques which may be followed. We 
may, on the one hand, by means of rewards and 
punishments cause the child or animal to perform 
or abstain from certain precise acts; or we may, 
on the other hand, seek to produce in the child or 
animal such emotions as will lead, on the whole, ^to 
acts of the kind desired. 

By a suitable distribution of rewards and punish- 
ments, it is possible to control a very large part of 
overt behaviour. 

Usually the only form of reward or punishment 
required will be praise or blame. By this method 
boys who are naturally timid can acquire physical 
courage, and children who are sensitive to pain can 
be taught a stoical endurance. Good manners, if not 
imposed earlier, can be learnt in adolescence by 
means of no worse punishment than the contemptuous 
lifting of an eyebrow. What is called “good form” is 
acquired by almost all who are exposed to it, merely 

57 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

from fear of the bad opinion incurred by infringing 
it. Those who have been taught from an early age to 
fear the displeasure of their group as the worst of 
misfortunes will die on the battlefield, in a war of 
which they understand nothing, rather than suffer the 
contempt of fools. The English public schools have 
carried this system to perfection, and have largely 
sterilized intelligence by making it cringe before the 
herd. This is what is called making a boy manly. 

As a social force, the behaviourist method of 
“conditioning” is therefore very powerful and very 
successful. It can and does cause men to act in ways 
quite different from those in which they would 
otherwise have acted, and it is capable of producing 
an impressive uniformity of overt behaviour. Never- 
theless, it has its limitations. 

It was through Freud that these limitations first 
became known in a scientific manner, though men 
of psychological insight had long ago perceived 
them in an intuitive way. For our purposes, the 
essential discovery of psycho-analysis is this : that an 
impulse which is prevented, by behaviourist methods, 
from finding overt expression in action, does not 
necessarily die, but is driven underground, and finds 
some new outlet which has not been inhibited by 
training. Often the new outlet will be more harmful 
than the one that has been prevented, and in any 
case the deflection involves emotional disturbance 
and unprofitable expenditure of energy. It is there- 
fore necessary to pay more attention to emotion, as 
58 



EMOTION AND DISCIPLINE 

opposed to overt behaviour, than is done by those 
who advocate conditioning as alone sufficient in the 
training of character. 

There are, moreover, some undesirable habits in 
regard to which the method of rewards and punish- 
ments fails completely, even from its own point of 
view. One of these is bed-wetting. When this per- 
sists beyond the age at which it usually stops, 
punishment only makes it more obstinate. Although 
this fact has long been known to psychologists, it is 
still unknown to most schoolmasters, who for years 
on end punish boys having this habit, without ever 
noticing that the punishment does not produce 
reform. The cause of the habit, in older boys, is 
usually some deep-seated unconscious psychological 
disturbance, which must be brought to the surface 
before a cure can be effected. 

The same kind of psychological mechanism ap- 
plies in many less obvious instances. In the case of 
definite nervous disorders this is now widely recog- 
nized. Kleptomania, for example, is not uncommon 
in children, and, unlike ordinary thieving, it cannot 
be cured by punishment, but only by ascertaining 
and removing its psychological cause. What is less 
recognized is that we all suffer, to a greater or less 
degree, from nervous disorders having an emotional 
origin. A man is called sane when he is as sane 
as the average of his contemporaries; but ip the 
average man many of the mechanisms which deter- 
mine his opinions and actions are quite fantastic, so 

59 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

much so that in a world of real sanity they would be 
called insane. It is dangerous to produce good social 
behaviour by means which leave the anti-social 
emotions untouched. So long as these emotions, 
while persisting, are denied all outlet, they will 
grow stronger and stronger, leading to impulses of 
cruelty which will at last become irresistible. In the 
man of weak will, these impulses may break out in 
crime, or in some form of behaviour to which social 
penalties are attached. In the man of strong will, 
they take even more undesirable forms. He may be 
a tyrant in the home, ruthless in business, bellicose 
in politics, persecuting in his social morality ; for all 
these qualities other men with similar defects of 
character will admire him; he will die universally 
respected, after having spread hatred and misery 
over a city, a nation, or an epoch according to his 
ability and his opportunities. Correct behaviour 
combined with bad emotions is not enough, there- 
fore, to make a man a contributor to the happiness 
of mankind. If this is our criterion of desirable con- 
duct, something more must be sought in the educa- 
tion of character. 

Such considerations, as well as the sympathetic 
observation of children, suggest that the behaviourist 
method of training character is inadequate, and 
needs to be supplemented by a quite different 
method. 

Experience of children shows that it is possible to 
operate upon feeling, and not only upon outward 

6o 



EMOTION AND DISCIPLINE 

behaviour, by giving children an environment in 
which desirable emotions shall become common 
and undesirable emotions rare. Some children (and 
some adults) are of a cheerful disposition, others are 
morose ; some are easily contented with any pleasure 
that offers, while others are inconsolable unless they 
can have the particular pleasure on which their 
hearts are set; some, in the absence of evidence, 
regard the bulk of human beings with friendly confi- 
dence, while others regard most people with terrified 
suspicion. The prevalent emotional attitude of the 
child generally remains that of the adult, though in 
later life men learn to conceal their timidities and 
grudges by disguises of greater or lesser effectiveness. 
It is therefore very important that children should 
have predominantly those emotional attitudes which, 
both in childhood and subsequently, will make them 
happy, successful, and useful, rather than those that 
lead to unhappiness, failure, and malevolence. 
There is no doubt that it is within the power of 
psychology to determine the kind of environment 
that promotes desirable emotions, and that often 
intelligent affection without science can arrive at the 
right result. When this method is rightly used, its 
effect on character is more radical and far more 
satisfactory than the effect to be obtained by 
rewards and punishments. 

The right emotional environment for a child, is a 
delicate matter, and of course varies with the child’s 
age. Throughout childhood, though to a continually 

6i 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

The man whose tongue is constricted by laws or 
taboos against free speech, whose pen is constricted 
by the censorship, whose loves are constricted by an 
ethic which considers jealousy a better thing than 
affection, whose childhood has been imprisoned in a 
code of manners, and whose youth has been drilled 
in a cruel orthodoxy, will feel against the world 
that hampers him the same rage that is felt by the 
infant whose arms and legs are held motionless. In 
his rage he will turn to destruction, becoming a 
revolutionary, a militarist, or a persecuting moralist 
according to temperament and opportunity. To 
make human beings who will create a better world 
is a problem in emotional psychology: it is the 
problem of making human beings who have a free 
intelligence combined with a happy disposition. 
This problem is not beyond the powers of science ; 
it is the will, not the power, that is lacking. 


64 



CHAPTER V 


HOME VERSUS SCHOOL 

That children should be educated entirely at home 
is an opinion which is now obsolete, although it is 
implied in the works of Locke and Rousseau, and 
was followed in bringing up Alexander, Hannibal, 
and John Stuart Mill. It is, in fact, only possible as 
regards the rich, and on this ground alone no 
longer needs discussion. But the proportions which 
should exist between home and school, and the age 
at which children should begin going to school, are 
legitimate matters of debate. 

The view adopted by most European States as 
regards most of the children of wage-earners is that 
they should go to day school from the age of six to 
the age of thirteen or fourteen. A certain percentage of 
the abler working-class boys and girls are encouraged 
by scholarships to continue their education beyond 
that age, while the sons and daughters of the well- 
to-do do so as a matter of course. There is no agree- 
ment as to the age up to which it would be desir- 
able, apart from difficulties due to public expense, 
to carry universal education ; nor is there any agree- 
ment as to whether day schools or boarding schools 
are preferable in themselves. It seems to be the 
general opinion that there is something called the 
“good home” which is better than any boarding 

E 65 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

school, but that some undefined percentage of 
homes are not “good” in the sense intended. For 
my part, I think the question difficult, as there are 
strong arguments on different sides. The question is 
really twofold: (i) At what age should school 
begin? (2) Should it be day school or boarding 
school? Let us take these questions in order. 

At what age should school begin? The answer 
must depend upon the home, but rather upon its 
topography than upon its moral or psychological 
character. A child who lives on a farm in the coun- 
try can happily and profitably spend his time 
wandering about, watching animals, observing hay- 
making, reaping, threshing, and ploughing, until 
the time comes when it is necessary to begin formal 
instruction. But for the urban child whose parents 
live in a cramped apartment the matter is quite 
otherwise. For him, school is desirable as an escape 
into freedom — ^freedom of movement, freedom of 
noise, and freedom of companionship. I have fre- 
quently met medical men who opposed nursery 
schools because they supposed that every school 
must be a place of instruction with fixed lessons. 
The right sort of nursery school will have only so 
much instruction as is necessary in order to keep 
the children amused. So far from straining children, 
it should afford them relief from the supervision and 
interference which are almost imavoidable in small 
homes. 

Urban children whose parents are not rich have 

66 



HOME VERSUS SCHOOL 

certain needs, physical and psychological, which 
cannot be satisfied at home. The first of these is 
light and air. Margaret McMillan found that a 
very large percentage of the children at her nursery 
school had rickets when they first came, and that 
almost all recovered by being in the open air. The 
second need is proper diet. This is not expensive, 
and could in theory be supplied at home, but in 
practice this is impossible owing to lack of know- 
ledge and culinary conservatism. The third need is 
space in which to romp and play. The children of 
the very poor find this in the street, but others are 
forbidden to do so. And in any case the street is not 
the best place for play. The fourth need is noise. It 
is cruel to a child to forbid him to make a noise, but 
in most homes several noisy children at once can 
make life intolerable for the grown-ups. The fifth 
need is the companionship of other children of 
about the same age, a need which begins towards 
the end of the second year, and rapidly increases. 
The sixth need is escape from parental interest ; this 
is a more important factor where the well-to-do are 
concerned than it is with the poorer classes, in which 
mothers are usually too busy to do as much harm 
to their children as middle-class mothers do by con- 
stant observation, however intelligent and benevo- 
lent. The seventh need is an environment containing 
appropriate amusements, but artificially safe,- i.e. 
without such things as stone steps or sharp corners 
or valuable fragile objects. Children deprived of all 

67 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

these needs until the age of six are likely to be 
sickly, unenterprising, and nervous. 

The problem of the care of young children in 
large towns is one to which the modern State, with 
the exception of the municipality of Vienna, is not 
yet alive. It is largely an architectural question. In 
the poorer quarters of cities, apartments should be 
built round three sides of a courtyard, leaving the 
south open to the sun. The centre space should be 
devoted to the children, who should play and eat 
there under supervision, returning to their parents 
for sleep. This would at once relieve the mothers 
and immensely benefit the children. But at present 
the individualism of the separate home stands in the 
way, especially in England, where it dominates 
architecture more than in any other country. 

It must, I suppose, be assumed that the rich 
would not allow their children to share the joys of 
such communal playgrounds. But it is as important 
for the children of the rich as for those of the poor 
to escape into freedom for a great part of the day. 
No urban home, however excellent, can supply 
what is necessary for the healthy mental and physi- 
cal growth of a child. Social selectness can be 
secured by high fees, but some form of nursery 
school is essential in any class. 

So far, we have been considering what are called 
the pre-school years. As children grow older, the 
arguments in favour of boarding schools grow 
stronger. Much the weightiest of these arguments is 
68 



HOME VERSUS SCHOOL 

that boarding schools can be in the country in the 
best surroundings, whereas day schools, for most 
children, must be in the town. Another argument, 
which applies in many cases though not in all, is 
that home is apt to be a place where a child is sub- 
jected to nervous strain. It may be that the parents 
quarrel, that the mother is over-anxious, that the 
father is unkind; there may be a favoured brother 
or sister, who causes the others to suffer from 
jealousy; either parent may be injudiciously affec- 
tionate. In one way or another, home is often too 
emotional. Children need a quiet life, containing 
enjoyments and activities, but few intense emotions. 
As against all this, it must, I think, be conceded 
that a due amount of wise parental affection is good 
for a child, giving him a sense of security and of his 
worth as a human being. Between these opposing 
considerations it is not easy to strike a balance. 

The question of home versus school is difficult to 
argue in the abstract. If ideal homes are contrasted 
with actual schools, the balance tips one way; if 
ideal schools are contrasted with actual homes, the 
balance tips the other way. I have no doubt in my 
own mind that the ideal school is better than the 
ideal home, at any rate the ideal urban home, 
because it allows more light and air, more freedom 
of movement, and more companionship of con- 
temporaries. But it by no means follows that the 
actual school will be better than the actual home. 
The majority of parents feel affection for their 

69 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

children, and this sets limits to the harm they do 
them. But education authorities have no affection 
for the children concerned ; at best, they are actuated 
by public spirit, which is directed towards the com- 
munity as a whole, and not merely towards the 
children; at worst, they are politicians engaged in 
squabbles for plums. At present, the home plays an 
important part in forming the mentality of the 
young, a part by no means wholly good, but per- 
haps better than that which would be played by 
the State if it were in sole control of children. Home 
gives the child experience of affection, and of a 
small community in which he is important; also of 
relations with people of both sexes and different 
ages, and of the multifarious business of adult life. 
In this way it is useful as a corrective of the artificial 
simplification of school. 

Another merit of home is that it preserves the 
diversity between individuals. If we were all alike, 
it might be convenient for the bureaucrat and the 
statistician, but it would be very dull, and would 
lead to a very unprogressive society. At present, the 
differences between individuals are greatly accen- 
tuated by the differences between their homes. Too 
much difference is a barrier to social solidarity, but 
some difference is essentijil to the best form of co- 
operation. An orchestra requires men with different 
talents and, within certain limits, different tastes; 
if all men insisted upon playing the trombone, 
orchestral music would be impossible. Social co- 
70 



HOME VERSUS SCHOOL 

operation, in like manner, requires differences of 
taste and aptitude, which are less likely to exist if 
all children are exposed to exactly the same influ- 
ences than if parental differences are allowed to 
affect them. This is to my mind an important 
argument against the Platonic doctrine that children 
should be wholly reared by the State. 

In the world as it is at present there are two 
agencies, outside the family, which are concerned 
with young people : the State is only one of them, 
the other being the Churches. In England, among 
the children of wage-earners, about two-thirds are 
educated by the State, but the remainder are 
divided between different religious bodies, chiefly 
Anglicans and Roman Catholics. The children of 
the well-to-do are mainly educated in an Anglican 
atmosphere. Most of the “best” girls’ schools are 
Anglo-Catholic, and the hold of religion on upper- 
and middle-class education is increasing. 

Both Church and State, as at present constituted, 
have certain defects as influences in education. I 
shall be considering these defects at length in later 
chapters, and will only say, by way of anticipation, 
that both Church and State demand assent to 
propositions which no unbiassed person can believe, 
and to a morality which is so cruel that it can only 
be accepted by those whose kindliness has been 
inhibited by dogma. Of incredible propositions, the 
following may serve as examples. The Roman 
Catholic Church holds that a priest can turn a 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

piece of bread into the Body and Blood of Christ by 
talking Latin to it; the British State holds that the 
Empire is a boon to subject nations. In order to 
cause young people to believe such propositions, it 
is necessary to keep them stupid, and to teach them 
not to use their powers of reasoning in certain direc- 
tions. Of a cruel morality, the following are instances. 
The Roman Catholic Church demands legislation 
such that, if a woman becomes pregnant by a syphilitic 
man, she must not artificially interrupt her pregnancy, 
but must allow a probably syphilitic child to be bom, 
in order that, after a few years of misery on earth, 
it may spend eternity in limbo (assuming its parents 
to be not Catholics). The British State considers it 
the duty of an Englishman to kill people who are 
not English whenever a collection of elderly gentle- 
men in Westminster tells him to do so. Such in- 
stances suffice to illustrate the fact that Church and 
State are implacable enemies of both intelligence 
and virtue. 

It is therefore dangerous to diminish the influence 
of home in education until we know what is going 
to take its place. Given a world State emancipated 
from theology, it is probable that the home would 
be of much less value to young people, and that 
they would, on the average, become both happier 
and more intelligent through the removal of 
parental influences. But at present, except in 
Russia, all progress has to be won in opposition 
to Church and State, and anything that increases 
72 



HOME VERSUS SCHOOL 

their hold over men’s minds is to be viewed with 
alarm. 

The question whether children should be removed 
from parents and brought up by the State must be 
considered, not only in relation to children, but also 
in relation to parents. The parental sentiment has a 
powerful influence upon behaviour, not only in 
women, but also in men. We have not the data to 
enable us to judge what men and women would be 
like if this sentiment were removed, but we may 
safely conjecture that they would be greatly changed. 
It is probable that most women would feel little 
desire for children in such circumstances, and that 
child-bearing would have to become a paid pro- 
fession, adopted as a branch of the civil service. It 
is probable that the relations of men and women 
would grow trivial, and that serious conjugal 
affection would become rare. It is probable that 
men would become less inclined to work hard, since 
at present, in middle life, the chief incentive of 
many men is desire to provide for their families. 
This is proved by the heavy payments men make 
for life insurance, which show that they care what 
happens to their families after they are dead. It may 
be doubted whether, in a world where the family 
did not exist, ordinary men would concern them- 
selves with events occurring after their death. It is 
possible that a kind of paralysis would descend upon 
the community, such as descends upon a hive of 
bees when the queen is removed. As to this, only 

73 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

experience can decide, and as yet experience is 
lacking. 

There is, however, a great deal to be said on the 
other side. All possessive emotions are dangerous, 
and not least those of parents for their children. 
The feelings of parents for their children are in- 
tensely individualistic and competitive; many men 
who, while they are childless, are full of public 
spirit become absorbed in the welfare of their own 
family as soon as they become fathers. The passion 
for private property is largely bound up with the 
family, and communists, from Plato downwards, are 
right in thinking that their economic system de- 
mands the cessation of private property in children. 
It is possible that whatever is admirable and useful 
in the parental sentiment could be transferred to 
the children in a given school, or, in exceptional 
individuals, to children in general. This, if it could 
be done, would be a definite moral advance. The 
parental sentiment is, I believe, the chief source of 
altruism, and many childless women have shown 
how valuable it can become when it is universalized. 
Perhaps, if it could be freed from the possessive 
taint which it must have while it is associated with 
actual physical parenthood, the world might lose 
some of its fierceness, and men might come to wish 
well to the generality of mankind. All this is con- 
jectural, but it is a hypothesis which should be 
borne in mind. 

The question of home versus school is one which, 

74 



HOME VERSUS SCHOOL 

up to a certain point, can be decided on a basis of 
common sense without raising fundamental issues. 
But when we try to pass beyond that point we are 
met by our ignorance of human psychology : we do 
not know how much in our sentiments is instinctive, 
or how vigorous our sentiments could be if they 
were trained to be quite other than they are at 
present. It is to be hoped that Russia will in time 
supply data which will enable us to know more on 
these questions ; in the meantime, the only scientific 
attitude is one of suspense of judgement. 


75 



CHAPTER VI 


ARISTOCRATS, DEMOCRATS, AND 
BUREAUCRATS 

The family and the State have been opposing 
forces ever since the State first existed : only in the 
Royal Family could the two harmonize emotionally. 
Consequently a pretence arose that the nation was 
a large family, of which the sovereign was the head. 
This view prevailed in China and Japan, in Mexico 
and Peru, and to some extent wherever the con- 
ception of divine kingship was strong. By such 
means a strong State could be created : the sentiment 
which made men loyal was partly religious venera- 
tion and partly respect for the head of the family. 
The impersonal State was a creation of the Greeks 
and Romans, especially the latter : the elder Brutus 
sacrificing his sons for the public good is a story 
embodying what may be called the religion of 
public spirit. In the East, this religion is quite 
recent, and a product of European influences. Con- 
fucius deliberately put filial piety above the law, 
and blamed a son who surrendered a criminal 
father to justice. In Japan, patriotism still has a 
great deal of the ancient character of devotion to 
the divine Head of the Family; when, as must 
happen, this sentiment decays under the influence 
of rationalism, it is doubtful whether the Japanese 
76 



ARISTOCRATS, DEMOCRATS, AND BUREAUCRATS 

polity will survive, and it is not improbable that it 
may give place to a government more on the 
Russian model. In China there has been a persistent 
attempt to create a modern patriotism in place of 
the old family feeling; this attempt has centred 
round the Kuo Min Tang party and the almost 
religious veneration for Sun Yat-sen. In India a 
modern patriotism is arising through hatred of the 
English. But in all these countries, since they lack 
the Roman tradition, patriotism as we understand 
it is still somewhat exotic. 

In modern times the closest approach to the 
Roman sentiment has existed in the British upper 
class. Elsewhere, until the French Revolution, the 
State was personified in the monarch; in England, 
after the execution of Charles I, the State and the 
monarch were sharply separated in men’s minds. 
Throughout the period from 1688 to 1832, England 
was, in effect, a patrician republic, in which the 
ruling families had that almost instinctive under- 
standing of public affairs that had characterized the 
Romans in their great days. I do not mean that 
either in England or in Rome the aristocracy 
showed any indifference to their private interests. 
The younger Brutus, that model of stern republican 
virtue, lent money to a municipality at 60 per 
cent., and when they failed to pay the interest he 
hired a private army to besiege them. The English 
aristocracy of the eighteenth century used their 
control over both Houses of Parliament to rob 


77 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

common people of their rights by means of the 
Enclosure Acts. Nevertheless, in both cases, the 
governing classes felt the State to be their personal 
concern, in a way which is scarcely possible for any 
individual in the vast democracies of the present 
day. 

Every social system has its appropriate educa- 
tional instrument, which in the case of the British 
oligarchy was the public school — Eton first and 
foremost, but also, though in a lesser degree, such 
schools as Harrow, Winchester, and Rugby. Through 
the operation of these schools the mentality of the 
eighteenth-century aristocrat remained that of the 
holders of political power throughout the nine- 
teenth century, in spite of profound changes in the 
nominal constitution. The public schools still exist 
and are still regarded by most well-to-do English- 
men as embodying all that is best in our tradition. 
It is therefore still necessary to discuss their con- 
tribution to our national life. 

Psychologically, the most important aspect of the 
preparatory and public school system is that, at an 
early age, it removes a boy from home and from all 
feminine influence, leaving him exposed defenceless 
to the ill-treatment of older boys and the possible 
hostility of his contemporaries, compelled to keep to 
himself all the desire for kindness and mothering 
which he retains from childhood, and obliged to 
centre such sentiment as he cannot repress exclu- 
sively upon other boys. At first he is likely to be very 
78 



aristocrats, democrats, and bureaucrats 

unhappy, but gradually, if he is not above the 
average in either sensitiveness or intelligence, he 
learns to wear an armour and to seem callous; in 
his school life he aims at power and glory to the 
exclusion of all other objects ; if he is good at ath- 
letics he may enjoy a prestige which he will not 
experience in later life until he has achieved some 
position of considerable public eminence. In his 
later years at school the respect of his juniors and 
his authority over them cause him to forget his 
initial unhappiness, and by the time he is forty he 
thinks that his school years were the happiest time 
of his life. But his happiness, such as it was, came 
from the exercise of trivial authority and the ad- 
miration which he received for unimportant merits. 
Instinctively he looks about for opportunities of 
similar enjoyments in later life: he desires people 
to govern, people to whom he will seem a god-like 
being. So he goes to live among uncivilized people, 
or at least people whom he believes to be uncivilized : 
he becomes an empire-builder, an outpost of culture, 
a man whose mission it is to bring Western enlighten- 
ment into dark places. If the “natives” regard him 
as the small boys did during his last days at school, 
all goes well : he is kind and gracious, upright and 
hard-working, stoical about the loneliness and dis- 
comfort, which are no worse than what he endured 
in his first years at school. 

But if the “natives” fail to admire him he begins 
to present a less pleasant picture. In contact with 

79 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

savages, where his superiority is unquestioned, he 
often does well because of his courage and en- 
durance; but in contact with an alien civilization, 
such as those of the East, he becomes pitiful. I have 
seen in the East men who considered themselves the 
fine flower of a public-school education confronted 
with learned Orientals, and it made me blush to 
be an Englishman. My compatriots might be red- 
faced, hard-drinking, spending their working hours 
in exploitation and their leisure in sport and bridge, 
wholly ignorant of Occidental culture, and not even 
aware that any Oriental culture exists. Yet, in 
contact with men who knew not only what was 
worth knowing in their own civilization, but far 
more than most public-school men of the civiliza- 
tion of the West, these ignorant boors would pre- 
serve the insolence of mihtary conquerors, content 
to let their superiority be proved by the guns of 
their warships. To this contemptuous brutahty the 
Japanese have repUed by adopting our standards, 
and the rest of the East is following their example. 
As an engine of imperialism, the public schools have 
failed. 

The causes of this failure are partly intellectual, 
partly psychological. To begin with the intellectual 
causes, which lie nearer the surface: the spirit of 
the public schools is one of contempt for intelligence, 
and more particularly for scientific intelligence. 
Masters are selected largely for their athletic quali- 
fications ; they must conform, at least outwardly, to 
8o 



ARISTOCRATS, DEMOCRATS, AND BUREAUCRATS 

a whole code of behaviour, religious, political, 
social, and moral, which is intolerable to most 
intelligent people ; they must encourage the boys to 
be so constantly occupied that they will have no 
time for sexual sin, and incidentally no time to 
think; they must discourage whatever traces of 
mental independence may survive here and there 
among the cleverer boys ; and in the end they must 
turn out a finished product so imbued with the 
worship of good form as to be incapable of learning 
anything important throughout the rest of life. 
These are a few of the intellectual defects of our 
public schools — defects inseparable from the fact 
that the public schools are designed to bolster up a 
system which is intellectually indefensible. 

The psychological defects of the preparatory and 
pubhc schools are due in the main to two causes, 
the isolation of the boys from female companion- 
ship, and the conventional code of morals. The 
younger boys at first inevitably miss the affection of 
mothers and older sisters and even nurses; in these 
circumstances their mothers often become objects 
of secret longing and worship, all the more intense 
because it is de rigueur to profess contempt for all 
women. After puberty they tend to practise mastur- 
bation or homosexuality or both, and many of them 
beUeve that in so doing they are being sinful. At 
best they are compelled to be furtive, since all the 
authorities regard sexual aberrations with horror. 
This state of affairs tends, in not a few of them, to 

8i 


F 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

enhance the mother-image as that of a woman who 
inspires an affection without carnal taint. This kind 
of sentiment not infrequently makes happy marriage 
impossible, and sometimes causes contempt for any 
woman with whom sexual intercourse is regarded 
as possible. The unhappiness resulting from this 
psychological tangle tends to cause cruelty, and to 
make power the only available source of happiness. 
The mentality of the imperialist is thus reinforced by 
the complexes of the sexually starved. 

The evils which exist in English public schools 
are perhaps not all inseparable from aristocratic 
education, but in the main they are likely to exist 
wherever there is a class which has hereditary social 
prominence. Such a class will aim mainly at the 
power of command; it will therefore cultivate the 
will rather than intelligence or sensibility, and will 
include in its training such elements of asceticism as 
are useful in giving will-power. Under the influence 
of wealth, aristocracies in the past have frequently 
become soft from luxury, or yielding from the 
growth of liberal opinion. Unless these dangers are 
guarded against, no aristocracy can long maintain 
itself. Thus both the good and the bad features of 
the English public schools are necessary in the 
education of a self-perpetuating aristocratic class. 
Aristocracy is now out of date, and England, by 
maintaining it, is coming to be viewed as a curious 
survival, like the marsupials. For this reason, rather 
than from any error of detail, Eton no longer has 

89 



ARISTOCRATS, DEMOCRATS, AND BUREAUCRATS 

the importance that it had a hundred years ago. 
Whatever system of education is to fit men to take 
their place in the modern world, it must not be an 
aristocratic system. 

Democratic education unadulterated has evils 
which are as great as those of aristocracy, if not 
greater. Democracy as a sentiment has two sides. 
When it says “I am as good as you,” it is whole- 
some; but when it says “you are no better than I 
am,” it becomes oppressive and an obstacle to the 
development of exceptional merit. To put the 
matter more accurately: democracy is good when 
it inspires self-respect, and bad when it inspires 
persecution of exceptional individuals by the herd. 
This sort of persecution, of course, exists in aristo- 
cratic schools, where exceptional boys are often 
subjected to grave ill-treatment. It is only under 
democracy, however, that this sort of thing becomes 
a theory as well as a practice, and extends beyond 
the school to the world at large. The toleration of 
eccentrics, which is one of the best features of 
English life, is connected with aristocracy. Byron 
and Shelley suffered social persecution, but less 
than they would have suffered in a democracy; 
moreover, they were better able to withstand it 
than they would have been without aristocratic 
self-respect. 

This, however, is not the chief educational evil 
of democracy. In America, where democratic senti- 
ment is strong, it is difficult to devise educational 

83 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

systems which give the necessary advantages to 
clever children. Something has been done in recent 
times in this direction, but it has been done, in the 
main, by those who are opposed to democracy. It is 
clear that some children are more talented than 
others, and that the more talented, if they are to be 
as happy and as useful to the community as possible, 
need different treatment from that which is best for 
average children. The error of aristocracy lay, not 
in thinking that some men are superior to others, 
but in supposing superiority to be hereditary. The 
error of democracy lies in regarding all claims to 
superiority as just grounds for the resentment of the 
herd. In the modern world, much work which is 
necessary to the community requires more ability 
than most men possess, and there must be ways of 
selecting exceptional men to do this work. In 
general, if they are to be as well qualified as possible, 
it is desirable to select them while they are still quite 
young — say twelve years old — and to allow them to 
make much more rapid progress than is possible to 
a class of average boys or girls. The feeling that it is 
undemocratic to single out the best pupils is one 
which leads to a great waste of good material. We 
shall deal with this question again in Chapter XII, 
and I shall therefore say no more about it, except 
that it is democratic sentiment run wild, not demo- 
cratic forms of government, that is the cause of the 
trouble. France is as democratic, politically, as 
America, but there is no difficulty in securing special 
84 



ARISTOCRATS, DEMOCRATS, AND BUREAUCRATS 

treatment for the able, because intellectual and 
artistic merit is respected, not only when it has 
achieved a great reputation, but while it is still in 
process of development. 

Democracy, as a theory, has not the hold on 
men’s minds that it had before the war. It has 
become evident that, in an industrial society, there 
are key positions of power, which, if not in the 
hands of private plutocrats, will be held by officials, 
who may, remotely, be subject to popular control, 
but will, in many respects, be able to take impor- 
tant decisions on their own initiative. We thus 
arrive at bureaucracy as the practical alternative to 
aristocracy and plutocracy. If everything possible is 
done to eliminate unjust privilege, power will still 
be unevenly distributed, because this is unavoid- 
able; but it will be given to those most fitted to 
exercise it. It will not, however, be irresponsible 
power, such as belongs to plutocrats and absolute 
monarchs; it will be power subject to ultimate 
control by the democracy. Men who are to exercise 
this sort of power wisely require qualities somewhat 
different from those produced by either democratic 
or aristocratic education. The undemocratic element 
consists in their being avowedly above the average 
in capacity and knowledge. The unaristocratic ele- 
ment consists in the fact that their position depends, 
not upon the social status of their fathers, but upon 
their personal abilities. And since they do not have 
ultimate and absolute power, they do not need 

85 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

exceptional aptitude for command, but only unusual 
powers of arriving at sound conclusions, and giving 
reasons for their conclusions to persons somewhat 
inferior to themselves in brains. 

It is clear that as society grows more organic — 
which is an effect of modem inventions and tech- 
nique — the importance of the bureaucrat con- 
tinually increases. To educate rightly those who are 
going to be officials is therefore very important in a 
scientific State. This requires, on the part of educa- 
tors and educational officials, respect for native 
intelligence in children and means of detecting it; 
it requires special classes for the more intelligent, 
and a curriculum designed to give them at once a 
broad mental outlook and what is necessary in the 
way of expert knowledge. There is a tendency to 
suppose that knowledge which is useful cannot give 
culture, and vice versa. I believe this to be a de- 
lusion. It is held that knowledge of the Peloponnesian 
War gives culture, whereas knowledge about the 
Russian Revolution is vulgar and reprehensible. 
Views of this sort are an obstacle, not only to the 
acquisition of useful knowledge, but also to sound 
culture, which should have a breadth and catholi- 
city of which it is perpetually being robbed by 
pedants. 

The education of the bureaucrat will be an educa- 
tion for a special type of citizenship. But it will not 
be a sound education so long as some knowledge has 
special prestige owing to its being traditional, while 
86 



ARISTOCRATS, DEMOCRATS, AND BUREAUCRATS 

Other departments of knowledge are thought un- 
important because they are not possessed by 
pedagogues. At the time of the Renaissance, the 
bulk of good literature was in Latin or Greek; 
now, this is not the czise. Most English public school- 
masters have not yet discovered this fact, and the 
British Government still selects its Civil Servants 
largely for proficiency in the classics, although a 
knowledge of French and German would be both 
more useful and of more cultural value. The narrow- 
ness of the traditional conception of culture has a 
great deal to do with the disrepute into which 
culture has fallen with the general public. Genuine 
culture consists in being a citizen of the universe, 
not only of one or two arbitrary fragments of space- 
time; it helps men to understand human society as 
a whole, to estimate wisely the ends that communi- 
ties should pursue, and to see the present in its 
relation to past and future. Genuine culture is 
therefore of great value to those who are to wield 
power, to whom it is at least as useful as detailed 
information. The way to make men useful is to 
make them wise, and an essential part of wisdom is 
a comprehensive mind. 


87 



CHAPTER VII 


THE HERD IN EDUCATION 

One of the most important factors in the formation 
of character is the influence of the herd upon the 
individual during childhood and youth. Many 
failures of integration in personality result from 
the conflict between two different herds to both 
of which a child belongs, while others arise from 
conflicts between the herd and individual tastes. 
It should be an important consideration in educa- 
tion to secure that the influence of the herd is not 
excessive, and that its operations are beneficial 
rather than harmful. 

Most young people are subject to the operation 
of two different kinds of herd, which may be called 
respectively the great herd and the small herd. The 
great herd is one composed not exclusively of young 
people, but of the whole society to which the child 
belongs. This is determined in the main by the 
child’s home, except where there is a very definite 
conflict between home and school, as happens, for 
example, with the children of immigrants in the 
United States. During the time that a boy or girl 
spends at school, the great herd is, however, of less 
importance than the small herd consisting of school- 
fellows. Every collection of human beings in habitual 
close proximity develops a herd feeling, which is 
88 



THE HERD IN EDUCATION 

shown in a certain instinctive uniformity of be- 
haviour, and in hostility to any individual having 
the same proximity but not felt as one of the group. 
Every new boy at school has to submit to a certain 
period during which he is regarded with unfriendly 
suspicion by those who are already incorporated 
in the school herd. If the boy is in no way peculiar, 
he is presently accepted as one of the group, and 
comes to act as the others act, to feel as they feel, 
and to think as they think. If, on the other hand, 
he is in any way unusual, one of two things may 
happen: he may become the leader of the herd, 
or he may remain a persecuted oddity. Some very 
few, by combining unusual good-nature with eccen- 
tricity, may become licensed lunatics, like “mad 
Shelley” at Eton. 

Conventional men acquire, during their school 
years, that quick and almost instinctive realization 
of what is demanded in order to be a conventional 
member of the herd, which is needed for common- 
place respectability in later life. If a fellow-member 
of a club does anything which is not entirely cor- 
rect, a man will remember from his boyhood the 
kind of treatment which was meted out to queer 
boys ; and, while modifying his behaviour to suit the 
code of adult civilization, he will still keep it, in 
its essential pattern, what it became in those early 
years. This constitutes the really effective moral 
code to which men are subjected. A man may do 
things which are immoral ; he may do things which 

89 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

arc illegal; he may be callous, or brutal, or, on 
a suitable occasion, rude; but he must not do any 
of those things for which his class will cold-shoulder 
him. What these things are depends, of course, 
upon the country and the age and the social class 
concerned. But in every country, in every age, and 
in every social class, there are such things. 

Fear of the herd is very deeply rooted in almost 
all men and women. And this fear is first implanted 
at school. It becomes, therefore, a matter of great 
importance in moral education that the things 
punished by the school herd shall be, as far as 
possible, undesirable things which it is within the 
boy’s power to alter. But to secure this is extremely 
difficult. The natural code for a herd of boys is, as 
a rule, not a very exalted one. And among the 
things which they are most likely to punish are 
things which do not lie within the power of their 
victims. A boy who has a birth-mark on his face, 
or whose breath is offensive, is likely to endure 
agonies at school, and not one boy in a hundred 
will consider that he deserves any mercy. I do not 
think this is inevitable. I think it is possible to 
teach boys a more merciful attitude, but the matter 
is difficult, and school-masters who like what is 
called manliness are not likely to do much in this 
direction. 

More serious, from a social, though not from an 
individual, point of view, is the case of those boys 
whose larger herd is in some way in opposition to 

90 



THE HERD IN EDUCATION 

the smaller herd of the school, such as Jews in a 
school composed mainly of Gentiles. Most Jews, 
even in the most liberal societies, have been sub- 
jected during boyhood to insults on account of 
their race, and these insults remain in their memory, 
colouring their whole outlook upon life and society. 
A boy may be taught at home to be proud of being 
a Jew : he may know with his intellect that Jewish 
civilization is older than that of most Western 
nations, and that the contribution of Jews has been, 
in proportion to their numbers, incomparably 
greater than that of Gentiles. Nevertheless, when 
he hears other boys shout “Sheeney!” or “Ike!” 
after him in tones of derision, he finds it difficult 
to remember that it is a fine thing to be a Jew; 
and if he does remember it, he remembers it de- 
fiantly. In this way a discord is planted in his soul 
between the standards of home and the standards 
of school. This discord is a cause of great nervous 
tension, and also of a profound instinctive fear. 
Apart from Jewish nationalism, there are two 
typical reactions to this situation: one that of the 
revolutionary, the other that of the toady. We 
may take Karl Marx and Disraeli as two extreme 
examples of these reactions. The hatred which Karl 
Marx felt for the existing order it is likely he would 
not have felt if he had been a Gentile. But having 
too much intelligence to hate Gentiles as suph, he 
transferred his hatred from Gentiles as a whole to 
capitalists. And since capitalists were, in fact, largely 

91 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

hateful, he succeeded, by viewing them with the 
eyes of hatred, in inventing a largely true theory 
of their place in the social order. Disraeli, who was 
a Jew in race but a Christian in religion, met the 
situation in another way. He admired, with the 
profoundest sincerity, the splendours of aristocracy 
and the magnificence of monarchy. There, he felt 
in his bones, was stability. There was safety from 
persecution. There was immunity from pogroms. 
The same fear of the hostile herd which, in Karl 
Marx, turned to revolution, turned in Disraeli to 
protective imitation. With amazing skill he made 
himself one of the admired herd, rose to supremacy 
within it, became the leader of a proud aristocracy, 
and the favourite of his sovereign. The keynote of 
his life is contained in his exclamation when the 
House of Commons laughed down his maiden 
speech; “The time will come when you shall hear 
me !” How different is the attitude of the born 
aristocrat in the face of laughter is illustrated by 
the story of the elder Pitt, who once began a 
speech in the House with the words : “Sugar, Sir — 
which caused a titter. Looking round, he repeated 
in louder tones: “Sugar, Sir — ,” and again there 
was a titter. A third time, with looks of wrath, and 
in a voice of thunder, he repeated : “Sugar, Sir — .” 
And this time not the faintest titter was to be heard. 

Many kinds of eminence, both good and bad, 
have been caused by the boy’s desire to wipe out 
some shame which he had suffered in the face of 


92 



THE HERD IN EDUCATION 

the herd. Of this sort of thing bastards afford an 
illustration. Edmund, in Lear, sets forth the way in 
which his being illegitimate has made him hostile 
to conventional people. I dare say William the 
Conqueror would not have been stirred to such 
notable deeds if he had not wished to wipe out the 
stain of his birth. 

So far we have been considering the effect of 
quite ordinary herds upon individuals who were 
abnormal either in character or in circumstance. 
But not infrequently there have been boyish herds 
of a more extreme sort, more vicious and more 
cruel than the herds to which most of us were 
accustomed in youth. Kropotkin, in his youth, was 
a member of the corps of pages, the aristocratic 
school in which boys specially favoured by the Czar 
were educated. His descriptions of the things that 
occurred in this school are interesting. He says, for 
example : 

“ . . . The first form did what they liked ; and not 
farther back than the preceding winter one of their 
favourite games had been to assemble the ‘green- 
horns’ at night in a room, in their nightshirts, and 
to make them run round, like horses in a circus, 
while the pages de chambre, armed with thick india- 
rubber whips, standing some in the centre and the 
others on the outside, pitilessly whipped the boys. 
As a rule the ‘circus’ ended in an Oriental fashion, 
in an abominable way. The moral conceptions 
which prevailed at that time, and the foul talk 

93 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

which went on in the school concerning what 
occurred at night after a circus, were such that the 
least said about them the better.” 

The influence of the school herd upon the 
character of remarkable men can hardly be over- 
estimated. Take, for example, Napoleon. Napoleon, 
in his youth, was at the aristocratic military college 
at Brienne, where almost all the other boys were 
rich and of the higher nobility. He was there as 
a result of a political concession which France had 
made to Corsica, in virtue of which a certain small 
number of Corsican youths were educated at Brienne 
free of charge. He was one of a large family, and 
his mother was poor. After he became Emperor, it 
was conveniently discovered that he was descended 
from an ancient Ghibelline family, but this was 
not known at the time. His clothes were plain and 
threadbare, while the other youths were in gor- 
geous raiment. He was a despised nobody, whom 
they viewed with haughty disdain. When the Revo- 
lution broke out, he sympathized with it, and one 
may suspect that an element in his sympathy was 
the thought of the humiliation which was being 
brought upon the comrades of his years at Brienne. 
But when he rose to be Emperor, a more exquisite 
and Arabian-Nights type of revenge became pos- 
sible. The very men who had despised him could 
now be made to sue for the privilege of bowing 
down before him. Can it be doubted that the 
snobbery that marred his later years of power had 
94 



THE HERD IN EDUCATION 

its source in the humiliations which he had suffered 
as a boy? His mother, who had not suffered the 
same humiliations, viewed his career with cynical 
detachment, and, against his wishes, insisted upon 
saving a large part of her salary in preparation for 
the day when his glories should be at an end. 

There have been a few great men, mostly 
monarchs, who never suffered the pressure of the 
herd at all. The most notable of these is Alexander 
the Great, who was not at any time one among a 
crowd of equals. Perhaps both his greatness and 
his faults were due in part to this fact. He was not 
held back from magnificent conceptions by any 
such modesty as is instilled into the new boy at 
school. Conceiving of himself as a conqueror, it 
seemed natural to conquer the whole world. Con- 
ceiving of himself as greater than all his contem- 
poraries, it seemed natural to think of himself as 
a god. In his dealings with his friends, even those 
who were nearest to him, he showed no sign of 
recognizing their rights. His murders of Parmenio 
and Cleitus, taken in isolation, suggest the cruel 
tyrant, but they are psychologically explicable as 
due to the impatience of a man who had at no 
time been subjected to the herd. 

The above illustrations are designed to suggest 
that the school herd is one of the most important 
factors in determining character, especially when 
it conflicts with some individual or social cfiarac- 
teristic in a boy of exceptional talents. The man 

95 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

who wishes to found a good school must think more 
about the character of the herd which he is creat- 
ing than about any other single element. If he 
himself is kindly and tolerant, but permits the 
school herd to be cruel and intolerant, the boys 
under his care will experience a painful environ- 
ment in spite of his excellences. I think that in some 
modern schools the doctrine of non-interference is 
carried to a point where this sort of thing may 
easily occur. If the children are never interfered 
with by the adults, the bigger children are likely 
to establish a tyranny over the smaller ones, so that 
the liberty which is supposed to be the watchword 
of the school will exist only for an aristocracy of 
the physically strong. It is, however, extremely 
difficult to prevent the tyranny of older children 
by means of direct disciplinary measures. If the 
grown-ups exercise force in their dealings with the 
older children, the older children will, in turn, 
exercise force in their dealings with the smaller 
ones. The thing to be aimed at is to have as little 
pressure of the herd as possible, and as little domi- 
nance of physical strength as is compatible with 
juvenile human nature. While it is well for boys and 
girls to learn the lesson of social dealings with their 
contemporaries, it is not well for them to be sub- 
jected to too intense a herd pressure. Herd pressure 
is to be judged by two things : first, its intensity, 
and second, its direction. If it is very intense, it 
produces adults who arc timid and conventional, 
96 



THE HEBX) IN EDUCATION 

except in a few rare instances. This is regrettable, 
however excellent may be the moral standards by 
which the herd is actuated. In Tom Brown's School- 
days there is a boy who is kicked for saying his 
prayers. This book had a great effect, and among 
my contemporaries I knew one who had been 
kicked at school for not saying his prayers. I regret 
to say that he remained through life a prominent 
atheist. Thus even this highly virtuous form of herd 
tyranny, when carried too far, becomes undesirable. 
Too much herd pressure interferes with individuality, 
and with the development of all such interests as 
are not common among average healthy boys, e.g. 
science and art, literature and history, and every- 
thing else that makes civilization. It cannot be 
denied, however, that emulation within the herd 
has its good points. It encourages physical prowess, 
and it discourages all kinds of sneaking underhand 
meanness. Within limits, therefore, it has its uses. 

These uses are much greater where the purposes 
of the herd are, on the whole, good, than where 
they are, for example, such as in Kropotkin’s 
account of the “corps of pages.” One of the ad- 
vantages of special schools for boys and girls of 
unusual ability is that, in such schools, the herd is 
likely to be far more enlightened than in ordinary 
schools, and far less hostile to civilized pursuits. 
But even where completely ordinary boys an4 girls 
are concerned, it is possible, by means of grown-up 
example, to produce a certain degree of toleration 

97 


o 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

and kindliness, and a considerable degree of in- 
terest in collective enterprises such as plays, for 
example, in which the herd instinct works co- 
operatively and not oppressively. 

For certain exceptionally strong characters, there 
is an educational value in standing out against the 
herd for some reason profoundly felt to be impor- 
tant. Such action strengthens the will, and teaches 
a man self-reliance. Provided he is not made to 
suffer too much, this may be all for the good; but 
if the herd makes him unhappy beyond a point, 
he will either yield and lose what was most excel- 
lent in his character, or become filled with a 
destructive rage, which may, as in Napoleon’s case, 
do untold harm to the world. 

With regard to the larger herd that lies outside 
the school, parents whose opinions are in any way 
unconventional are faced with a perplexity which 
many of them find it very difficult to resolve. If 
they send their children to a school where unusual 
opinions are encouraged, or where unusual free- 
doms are permitted, they fear that, on entering 
the larger world, the boy or girl will not be readily 
adaptable to things as they are. Those who have 
been allowed to think and speak freely about sex 
will be oppressed by the usual reticences and 
pruderies. Those who have not been taught patrio- 
tism will have a difficulty in finding a niche in our 
nationalistic world. Those who have not been taught 
respect for constituted authority will find themselves 
98 



THE HERD IN EDUCATION 

in trouble through the freedom of their criticisms. 
And, in a word, those who have been used to free- 
dom will feel the chains of slavery more irksome 
than those who have been slaves from birth. Such, 
at least, is the argument which I have frequently 
heard advanced by liberal-minded parents in favour 
of an illiberal education for their children. 

There are, I think, two answers to this argument, 
one comparatively superficial, the other fundamen- 
tal. The first of these answers consists in pointing 
out that external conformity of behaviour is a thing 
which young people learn easily, and that, in fact, 
it is universally taught in all conventional systems 
of education, where the behaviour of children before 
parents and teachers is totally different from their 
behaviour with each other. It is, I believe, quite 
as easy to learn this conformity in adolescence 2is 
to learn it at an earlier age. To some degree it is 
a mere matter of good manners. It would be rude 
to talk to a Mussulman against Mahomet, or to a 
judge against the criminal law. It may be our 
public duty to express opinions on either of these 
subjects publicly, but it can hardly be our duty to 
express them privately in quarters where they can 
only cause pain and anger. I do not believe that 
a free education need make a boy or girl incapable 
of kindly manners, nor of that degree of external 
decorum which conventional life demands. Nor do 
I believe that the pain of conformity after a free 
education is nearly so great as the pain caused by 

99 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

the complexes which are implanted in the course 
of a conventional education. So much for the first 
answer. 

The second answer goes deeper. Our world con- 
tains grave evils, which can be remedied if men 
wish to remedy them. Those who are aware of 
these evils and fight against them are likely, it is 
true, to have less everyday happiness than those 
who acquiesce in the status quo. But in place of 
everyday happiness they will have something which 
I, for my part, value more highly, both for myself 
and for my children. They will have the sense of 
doing what lies in their power to make the world 
less painful. They will have a more just standard 
of values than is possible for the easy-going con- 
formist. They will have the knowledge that they 
are among those who prevent the human race from 
sinking into stagnation or despair. This is something 
better than slothful contentment, and if a free 
education promotes this, parents ought not to shrink 
from the incidental pains which it may involve for 
their children. 


lOO 



CHAPTER VIII 


RELIGION IN EDUCATION 

Religion is a complex phenomenon, having both 
an individual and a social aspect. At the beginning 
of historical times, religion was already old : through- 
out history, increase of civilization has been corre- 
lated with decrease of religiosity. The earliest 
religions of which we know were social rather than 
individual : there were powerful spirits who punished 
or rewarded the whole tribe according as indivi- 
dual members of the tribe behaved offensively or 
pleasantly. The feelings of the spirits, as to the sort 
of behaviour that was offensive or pleasant, were 
ascertained by induction and recorded in priestly 
tradition. If an earthquaike or a pestilence destroyed 
the inhabitants of some region, prudent men would 
enquire which of their habits were peculiar, and 
decide that such habits were in future to be avoided. 
This point of view is by no means extinct. I knew 
a Vicar in the Church of England who thought 
that the defeat of the Germans in the Great War 
was due to their fondness for the Higher Criticism, 
since he held that the Creator of the universe ob- 
jects to textual exegesis of Hebrew manuscripts. 

Religion, as its advocates are in the habit of 
telling us, is the source of the sense of social obli- 
gation. When a man did something displeasing to 

lOI 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

the gods, they were apt to punish not only the 
guilty individual but the whole tribe. Consequently 
his conduct was a matter of general concern, since 
private vices caused public calamities. This point 
of view still dominates the criminal law. There are 
sexual abnormalities for which men suffer imprison- 
ment, although, from a rational standpoint, their 
behaviour concerns only themselves; if any justi- 
fication of their punishment is to be attempted, it 
must be based upon what befell the Cities of the 
Plain, since only so can their conduct make any 
difference to the community. It is a curious fact 
that the things to which the gods object are seldom 
things that would do much harm if they did not 
arouse the divine wrath. They object to one’s eating 
pork or eating beef or marrying one’s deceased 
wife’s sister; in the time of King David, Gk)d ob- 
jected to a census, and slew so many people by 
a pestilence that King David’s statistics were ren- 
dered worthless. The Aztecs’ gods insisted on human 
sacrifice and cannibalism before they would show 
favour to their worshippers. Nevertheless, although 
the moral codes resulting from religion have been 
curious, it must be admitted that it is religion that 
has given rise to them. If any morality is better than 
none, then religion has been a force for good. 

Although religion began as an affair of the tribe, 
it early developed also a purely individual aspect. 
From about the sixth century b.c., widely separated 
movements began in the ancient world, which con- 


102 



RELIGION IN EDUCATION 

cemed themselves with the individual soul and with 
what a Christian would call salvation. Taoism in 
China, Buddhism in India, the Orphic religion in 
Greece, and the Hebrew prophets, all had this 
character: they arose from the perception that the 
natural life is sorrowful, and from the search for 
a way of life which should enable men to escape 
misfortune, or at least to bear it. At a not much 
later date Parmenides inaugurated the great tra- 
dition of religious philosophy by his doctrine of the 
unreality of time and the one-ness of all things. 
From him as ancestor come Plato, Plotinus, the 
Fathers, Spinoza, Hegel, Bergson, and all the philo- 
sophers of mysticism. From the Hebrew prophets 
comes the type of religion which is concerned less 
with metaphysics than with righteousness ; this type 
is predominant in Protestantism. In every form of 
Christianity there is both a moral and a meta- 
physical element, owing to the fact that Christianity 
arose from an intimate blend of Judaism and Hel- 
lenism; but on the whole, as Christianity travelled 
westward, it became less metaphysical and more 
moral. Islam, except in Persia, has always had only 
a very slight element of metaphysics, while the 
religions emanating from India have been predomi- 
nantly philosophic. 

Ever since the rise of individual religion, the 
personal and the institutional elements in the re- 
ligious life have been at war with one another. 
The institutional elements have usually been poli- 

103 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

tically the stronger, since they were supported by 
priests and endowments and traditions, as well as 
by government and the law. Personal religion is 
a private matter, which should in no way concern 
the community. But institutional religion is a matter 
of great political importance. Wherever institutional 
religion exists, property is connected with it, and 
a man can make a living by advocating its tenets, 
but not (or not so easily) by opposing them. In so 
far as education is influenced by religion, it is in- 
fluenced by institutional religion, which controls 
ancient foundations, and in many countries con- 
trols the State. At present, in most of the countries 
of Western Europe, religion dominates the educa- 
tion of the rich, while it has less influence on the 
education of the poor. This is to some extent a 
political accident: where no one religion is strong 
enough to impose itself on the State, State schools 
cannot teach the doctrines of a particular sect, but 
schools supported by the fees of the pupils can 
teach whatever parents think worth paying for. 
In England and France, largely as a result of this 
state of affairs, the rich are much more religious 
than the urban poor. When I say they are “religious,” 
I am using the word in a political sense: I do not 
mean that they are pious, nor even necessarily that 
they give a metaphysical assent to Christian dogma, 
but only that they support the Chvurch, vote with 
it in legislative questions, and wish their children 
to be in the care of those who accept its teaching. 

104 



RELIGION IN EDUCATION 

It is for this reason that the Church is still 
important. 

Among liberal-minded laymen, one meets, not 
infrequently, the view that the Chmch has ceased 
to be a weighty factor in the life of the community. 
This is, to my mind, a profoimd error. The law of 
marriage and divorce, though not quite what most 
ecclesiastics would wish, retains absurdities and 
cruelties — such as the refusal of divorce for insanity 
— ^which would not survive a week but for the 
influence of Christian Churches. Open opponents 
of Christianity are handicapped in many W’ays in 
competition with those who are more pious or more 
discreet; in practice, many posts are not open to 
avowed atheists, who require more ability to achieve 
success than is required by the orthodox. 

It is in education, more than anywhere else, that 
institutional religion is important at the present 
day. In England, all public schools and almost all 
preparatory schools are either Anglican or Roman 
Catholic. It is sometimes said, by free-thinking 
parents who send their children to such schools, 
that most people react against their education, and 
that therefore it is as well to teach falsehood to the 
young in order that, after they have reacted, they 
may believe what is true. This argument is a mere 
excuse for timid conventionality, which a moment’s 
reflection shows to be statistically fallacious. The 
immense majority of adults believe through life 
most of what they were taught in youth. Countries 

105 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

remain Protestant, Catholic, Mahometan, or what- 
ever they may be, for centuries on end, whereas 
if the doctrine of reaction were true they ought to 
change their religion in each generation. The very 
men who advance such an argument for having 
their children taught orthodoxy show, by their con- 
duct, how little they have reacted. If you believe 
privately that two and two are four, but avoid 
proclaiming this opinion, and hold it right that 
public money should be spent in teaching your 
children and the children of others that two and 
two are five, your effective opinion, from a social 
point of view, is that two and two are five, and 
your private personal conviction to the contrary 
becomes unimportant. So those who, while not 
themselves religious, believe a religious education 
to be desirable, have not in any effective way 
reacted against their own religious education, how- 
ever they may protest to the contrary. 

Many of those who do not give an intellectual 
assent to the dogmas of religion, hold that religion, 
nevertheless, is harmless and perhaps even benefi- 
cent. On this point I find myself at one with the 
orthodox, as opposed to what are called “liberal” 
thinkers : it seems to me that the questions whether 
there is a God and whether we persist after death 
are important, and that it is well to think as truly 
as possible on these matters. I cannot take the poli- 
tician’s view that, even if there be not a God, it 
is desirable that most people should think there is, 
io6 



RELIGION IN EDUCATION 

since this belief encourages virtuous conduct. Where 
children are concerned, many freethinkers adopt 
this attitude: how can you teach children to be 
good, they ask, if you do not teach them religion? 
How can you teach them to be good, I should 
reply, if you habitually and deliberately lie to them 
on a subject of the greatest importance? And how 
can any conduct which is genuinely desirable need 
false beliefs as its motive? If there are no valid 
arguments for what you consider “good” conduct, 
your conception of goodness must be at fault. And 
in any case it is parental authority rather than 
religion that influences the behaviour of children. 
What religion mainly does is to give them certain 
emotions, not very closely bound up with action, 
and not, for the most part, very desirable. Indirectly, 
no doubt, these emotions have effects upon be- 
haviour, though by no means such effects as religious 
educators profess to desire. This, however, is a 
subject to which I shall return later. 

The bad effects of religious education depend 
partly upon the particular doctrines taught and 
partly upon the mere insistence that various doubt- 
ful propositions are known to be true. WTiether 
these propositions are in fact true or not may be 
undiscoverable, but in attempting to make the 
young regard them as certain, religious teachers are 
teaching what is false, since, whether true in fact 
or not, the propositions in question are emphatically 
not certain. Take, for example, the future life. On 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

this matter wise men confess their ignorance: the 
evidence is insufficient, and suspense of judgement 
is the only rational attitude. But the Christian 
religion has pronounced in favour of a future life, 
and the young who are brought up under its in- 
fluence are taught to regard survival after death 
as a certainty. “What does it matter?” the reader 
may say ; “the belief is comforting, and cannot do 
any harm.” I should reply that it does harm in the 
following ways. 

First : any exceptionally intelligent child, who dis- 
covers by reflection that the arguments for immor- 
tality are inconclusive, will be discouraged by his 
teachers, perhaps even punished; and other chil- 
dren who show any inclination to think likewise 
will be discouraged from conversation on such 
topics, and if possible prevented from reading books 
that might increase their knowledge and their 
reasoning power. 

Secondly: since most people whose intelligence 
is much above the average are nowadays openly 
or secretly agnostic, the teachers in a school which 
insists on religion must be either stupid or hypo- 
critical, unless they belong to that small class of 
men who, owing to some kink, have intellectual 
ability without intellectual judgement. What hap- 
pens in practice is that men who intend to adopt 
the scholastic profession begin at an early age to 
close their minds against adventurous thoughts; 
they become timid and conventional, first in theo- 

io8 



RELIGION IN EDUCATION 

logy and then, by a natural transition, in everything 
else; like the fox who had lost his tail, they tell 
their pupils that it is good to be timid and con- 
ventional; after they have done this for a sufficient 
length of time, their merit is observed by the autho- 
rities, and they are promoted to positions of power. 
The type of man who can keep his job as a teacher 
and make a success of his career is thus largely 
determined by the theological or other tests which, 
explicitly or implicitly, limit the choice of teachers, 
and exclude from the teaching profession most of 
those who are best fitted to stimulate the young 
both intellectually and morally. 

Thirdly: it is impossible to instil the scientific 
spirit into the young so long as any propositions 
are regarded as sacrosanct and not open to question. 
It is of the essence of the scientific attitude that it 
demands evidence for whatever is to be believed, 
and that it follows the evidence regardless of the 
direction in which it leads. As soon as there is a 
creed to be maintained, it is necessary to surround 
it with emotions and taboos, to state in tones vibrant 
with manly pathos that it contains “great” truths, 
and to set up criteria of truth other than those of 
science, more especially the feelings of the heart 
and the moral certainties of “good” men. In the 
great days of religion, when men believed, as Thomas 
Aquinas did, that pure reason could demonstrate 
the fundamental propositions of Christian thtsology, 
sentiment was unnecessary: St. Thomas’s Summa is 

109 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

as cool and rational as David Hume. But those 
days are past, and the modern theologian allows 
himself to use words charged with emotion so as 
to produce in his reader a state of mind in which 
the logical cogency of an argument will not be too 
closely scrutinized. The intrusion of emotion and 
sentimentality is always the mark of a bad case. 
Imagine the methods of religious apologists applied 
to the proposition 2 + 2 = 4. The result would be 
something as follows : “This great truth is acknow- 
ledged alike by the busy man of affairs in his office, 
by the statesman engaged in the computation of 
the national revenue, by the booking-office clerk 
in his efforts to meet the claims of the so-called 
Tush hour,’ by the innocent child buying lolhpops 
to delight his baby brother, and by the humble 
Eskimo counting his catch of fish on the frozen 
shores of the Arctic ocean. Can so wide a unani- 
mity have been produced by anything other than 
a deep human recognition of a profound spiritual 
need? Shall we listen to the sneering sceptic who 
would rob us of the shining heritage of wisdom 
handed down to us from times less out of touch 
with the infinite than our age of jazz? No! A thou- 
sand times No!” But it may be doubted whether 
boys would learn arithmetic better by this method 
than by those in vogue at present. 

For such reasons as we have been considering, 
any creed, no matter what, is likely to be harmful 
in education when it is regarded as exempt from 


no 



RELIGION IN EDUCATION 


the intellectual scrutiny to which our more scien- 
tific beliefs are subjected. There are, however, 
various special objections to the kind of religious 
instruction to which, in Christian countries, a large 
percentage of children are exposed. 

In the first place, religion is a conservative force, 
and preserves much of what was bad in the past. 
The Romans offered human sacrifices to the gods 
as late as the second Punic War, but apart from 
religion they would not have done anything so 
barbaric. Similarly in our own day men do things 
from religious motives which, apart from religion, 
would seem intolerably cruel. The Roman Catholic 
Church still believes in hell. The Anglican Church, 
as a result of a decision of the lay members of 
the Privy Council against the opposition of the 
Archbishops of Canterbury and York, does not 
regard hell as de fide’, nevertheless, most Anglican 
clergymen still believe in hell. All who believe in 
hell must regard vindictive punishment as permis- 
sible, and therefore have a theoretical justification 
for cruel methods in education and the treatment 
of criminals. The immense majority of ministers 
of religion support war whenever it occurs,' though 
in peace-time they are often pacifists ; in supporting 
war, they give emphatic utterance to their con- 
viction that God is on their side, and lend religious 
support to the persecution of men who think 
wholesale slaughter unwise. While slavery existed, 

• On thb subject, see quotations in Joad, Under the Fifth Rib, pp. 69 ff. 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

religious arguments were found in support of it; 
nowadays, similar arguments are found in support 
of capitalistic exploitation. Almost all traditional 
cruelties and injustices have been supported by 
organized religion until the moral sense of the lay 
community compelled a change of front. 

In the second place, the Christian rehgion offers 
comforts to those who accept it, which it is painful 
to have to forgo when belief fades. Belief in God 
and a future life makes it possible to go through life 
with less of stoic courage than is needed by sceptics. 
A great many young people lose faith in these 
dogmas at an age at which despair is easy, and 
thus have to face a much more intense unhappi- 
ness than that which falls to the lot of those who 
have never had a religious upbringing. Christianity 
offers reasons for not fearing death or the universe, 
and in so doing it fails to teach adequately the virtue 
of courage. The craving for rehgious faith being 
largely an outcome of fear, the advocates of faith 
tend to think that certain kinds of fear are not to 
be deprecated. In this, to my mind, they are gravely 
mistaken. To allow oneself to entertain pleasant 
beliefs as a means of avoiding fear is not to live 
in the best way. In so far as religion makes its appeal 
to fear, it is lowering to human dignity. 

In the third place, when religion is taken seriously, 
it involves viewing this world as unimportant in 
comparison with the next, thereby leading to the 
advocacy of practices which cause a balance of 



REUGION IN EDUCATION 


misery here below on the ground that they will 
lead to happiness in heaven. The chief illustration 
of this point of view is in questions of sex, which 
I shall consider in the next chapter. But there is 
undoubtedly, in those who accept Christian teach- 
ing genuinely and profoundly, a tendency to mini- 
mize such evils as poverty and disease, on the 
ground that they belong only to this earthly life. 
This doctrine falls in very conveniently with the 
interests of the rich, and is perhaps one of the reasons 
why most of the leading plutocrats are deeply 
religious. If there is a future life, and if heaven is 
the reward for misery here below, we do right to 
obstruct all amelioration of terrestrial conditions, 
and we must admire the unselfishness of those cap- 
tains of industry who allow others to monopolize 
the profitable brief sorrow on earth. But if the 
belief in a hereafter is mistaken, we shall have 
thrown away the substance for the shadow, and 
shall be as unfortunate as those who invest a life- 
time’s savings in enterprises that go bankrupt. 

In the fourth place, the effect of religious teach- 
ing upon morahty is bad in various ways. It tends 
to sap self-reliance, especially when it is associated 
with the confessional; through teaching the young 
to lean upon authority, it often makes them in- 
capable of self-direction. I have known men who 
had been educated as Roman Catholics and who, 
when they lost their faith, behaved in ways* which 
must be regarded as regrettable. Some would say 

H 113 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

that such men show the moral utility of religion, 
but I should say quite the opposite, since the weak- 
ness of will which they display is a direct result of 
their education. Moreover, when religion is pre- 
sented as the only ground for morality, a man 
who ceases to believe in religion is likely to cease 
to believe in morality. Samuel Butler’s hero in 
The Way of all Flesh raped the housemaid as soon 
as he ceased to be a Christian. There are many 
sound reasons for not raping housemaids, but the 
young man in question had not been taught any 
of them; he had only been taught that such acts 
are displeasing to God. In view of the fact that, in 
our day, loss of faith is a quite probable occurrence, 
it is imprudent to base all morality, even the indis- 
pensable minimum, upon a foundation so likely to 
give way. 

Another morally undesirable aspect of religious 
education is that it underestimates the intellectual 
virtues. Intellectual impartiality, a most important 
quality, it regards as positively bad ; persistent 
attempts to understand difficult matters it views, 
at best, with toleration. The individuals whom it 
holds up for admiration in the present day are 
seldom men of first-rate intelligence; when they 
are, it is because of some folly to which they have 
given utterance in a foolish moment. Owing to the 
identification of religion with virtue, together with 
the fact that the most religious men are not the 
most intelligent, a religious education gives courage 

1 14 



REUGION IN EDUCATION 

to the Stupid to resist the authority of educated men, 
as has happened, for example, where the teaching 
of evolution has been made illegal. So far as I can 
remember, there is not one word in the Gospels in 
praise of intelligence ; and in this respect ministers 
of religion follow gospel authority more closely than 
in some others. This must be reckoned as a serious 
defect in the ethics taught in Christian educational 
establishments. 

The fundamental defect of Christian ethics con- 
sists in the fact that it labels certain classes of acts 
“sins” and others “virtues” on grounds that have 
nothing to do with their social consequences. An 
ethic not derived from superstition must decide first 
upon the kind of social effects which it desires to 
achieve and the kind which it desires to avoid. It 
must then decide, as far as our knowledge permits, 
what acts will promote the desired consequences; 
these acts it will praise, while those having a con- 
trary tendency it will condemn. Primitive ethics 
do not proceed in this way. They select certain 
modes of behaviour for censure, for reasons which 
are lost in anthropological obscurity. On the whole, 
among successful nations, the acts condemned tend 
to be harmful, and the acts praised tend to be 
beneficial, but this is never the case as regards every 
detail. There are those who hold that originally 
animals were domesticated for religious reasons, not 
from utility, but that the tribes which tried to 
domesticate the crocodile or the lion died out, 

"5 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

while those which chose sheep and cows prospered. 
Similarly, where tribes with different ethical codes 
conflicted, those whose code was least absurd might 
be expected to be victorious. But no code with a 
superstitious origin can fail to contain absurdities. 
Such absurdities are to be found in the Christian 
code, though less now than formerly. The prohibi- 
tion of work on Sunday can be defended rationally, 
but the prohibition of play and amusement cannot. 
The prohibition of theft is, in general, sound, but 
not when it is applied, as it was by the Churches 
in post-war Germany, to prevent public appropria- 
tion of the property of exiled princes. The super- 
stitious origin of Christian ethics is most evident 
in the matter of sex ; but this is so large a subject 
that it demands a separate chapter. 



CHAPTER IX 


SEX IN EDUCATION 

The opinions entertained by civilized adults on the 
subject of sex morals are not infrequently quite 
different from those which they desire to be taught 
to their children. There is a traditional moral code 
still accepted in all sincerity by a section of the 
population, but accepted by others only nominally 
and as a matter of respectability. In general, those 
whose opinions on sex matters are traditional have 
much more confidence in proclaiming and preaching 
their doctrines than have those who view the tradi- 
tional code with doubt. Those who are prepared, in 
their own private behaviour and in their opinion of 
the private behaviour of their friends, to be latitu- 
dinarian, are seldom quite clear as to what their 
ethic is, and still more seldom willing to express 
publicly any dissent from the conventional code. 
Moreover, they tend to think that the strength of 
the sexual passion is sure to lead men and women 
into acts contrary to whatever code they may hold, 
and that therefore the right degree of liberty in 
action is most likely to be secured when theory is 
more stringent than a strict regard for truth would 
warrant. A person who thinks that in no circum- 
stances whatever is sexual intercourse outside mar- 
riage justifiable may come, under the stress of deep 

117 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

love, to feel that in this particular case the circum- 
stances are so peculiar as to allow of relaxation of 
the code. The person who thinks that a great love 
justifies relations outside marriage will tend to 
suppose that every passing fancy is a great love. The 
man who thinks that even passing fancies are 
legitimate, provided they are mutual and not 
mercenary, may be tempted to forget the mutuality 
and to introduce mercenary considerations sur- 
reptitiously. In such ways most people tend to a 
greater freedom in action than in theory. Therefore, 
in advocating any kind of sex freedom, it is always 
necessary to remember that the freedom which will 
be taken is likely to exceed that which is advocated. 

Whatever view may be taken as to the right sexual 
morals for adults, there are a number of questions 
concerning the sex education of children which can 
be considered on grounds of common sense and 
psychology without raising any fundamental issues. 
It is the custom to leave education in the hands of 
persons exceptionally ignorant, bigoted, and narrow- 
minded. The children of the well-to-do are left, 
during their first years, very largely in the hands of 
nurses who are usually celibate and almost always 
prudish. When later they come under the care of 
more educated women, these women are still as a 
rule celibate, and it is expected that they should be 
of impeccable moral character. This means that as 
a rule they are timid, sentimental, and afraid of 
reality. It means also that their opinions on sex are 

118 



SEX IN EDUCATION 


vehement, but ill-informed. School-masters, while 
not necessarily celibate, are expected to have a high 
moral tone, viz. to decide practical questions by 
traditional prejudice rather than by scientific psycho- 
logy. Most of them would think the psychology of 
infantile sex a nasty subject, concerning which it is 
well to be ignorant. Of the harmful consequences of 
their ignorance they remain blissfully unaware. 

Most children, by the time they are two years old, 
have already been taught to regard their sexual 
parts superstitiously as in some way mysterious and 
awful, and requiring to be treated in a quite special 
way. They are taught to mention their natural 
necessities in a whisper or by a euphemism, and if 
they are seen touching those parts of their anatomy 
which nurses consider intangible, they are severely 
lectured. I know men and women whose mothers 
saw them thus engaged when they were little 
children, and told them they would rather see them 
dead. (This is by no means uncommon.) I regret to 
say that they have not turned out patterns of con- 
ventional virtue. Masturbation is nearly universal 
among very young children, and is usually met with 
dire threats. In Germany, as one learns from Freud, 
boys are told that a stork will come and mutilate 
them, and if by any chance they see a girl naked, 
they are likely to think that she is one to whom this 
has happened. Facts of this sort are well known to 
readers of psycho-analytic literature, but it is illegal 
for such literature to be read by those who are 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

likely to do harm owing to not having read it. 
Nervous disorders in later life are frequently trace- 
able to threats as to the consequence of masturba- 
tion by which infants are terrified. Throughout their 
school life boys are apt to be told by school-masters 
that masturbation leads to insanity. The truth is 
that the threats as to the evil consequences of mas- 
turbation not infrequently lead to insanity, but 
masturbation itself, so long as it is completely 
ignored by adults, does very little harm, especially 
in infancy. 

The secrecy as to the method by which children 
come into the world has many bad effects. In the 
first place, it involves the belief that some knowledge 
is bad, and more especially that interesting know- 
ledge is bad. It should be one of the fundamental 
principles of any sound ethic that all knowledge is 
good, and that to this no exception whatever can 
be admitted. The child who finds that his natural 
curiosity in certain directions is met with frowns 
and rebuffs learns to suppose that knowledge is 
good when it is uninteresting, but bad when it is 
interesting. In this way scientific curiosity becomes 
opposed to virtue, and the child’s efforts to be good 
become efforts to be stupid, too often, alas ! success- 
ful. For girls it is very bad to be kept in ignorance 
of the facts of gestation. Girls tend to feel themselves 
inferior to boys, and to wish that they were boys. 
So long as they do not know about gestation it 
appears as though men were better than women at 


ISO 



SEX IN EDUCATION 


almost everything. I have seen girls acquire a new 
respect for their sex, and a new contentment in 
being girls, as soon as they came to know of the 
part played by women in creating children. But if 
children are told the part of the mother without 
being told the part of the father, there is an unfair- 
ness to boys analogous to that which complete 
silence involves towards girls. Moreover, children 
who are fond of their fathers are glad to know that 
they have a physical connection with them as well 
as with their mothers. It is as necessary to the self- 
respect of boys to know the father’s part in pro- 
creation as it is to that of girls to know the mother’s 
part in gestation. 

Another bad effect of the policy of silence about 
the facts of sex is that it causes children to know 
that their parents lie to them. Children generally 
find out the truth much sooner than parents sup- 
pose, and after they have found it out they not 
infrequently continue to ask questions of their 
parents, and register the untruthful answers with a 
certain youthful cynicism. Lying to children, al- 
though moralists do not think so, is an undesirable 
practice, and an ethic which demands it can hardly 
be sound. 

It is important that information on sexual sub- 
jects should be given in exactly the same tone of 
voice, and in the same manner, as information on 
other subjects. And it should be given with the same 
directness. There is a certain school of thought 

I2I 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

which considers that children should first be told 
about the loves of flowers, then about the innocent 
gambols of lobsters, and only after a long biological 
preface about the behaviour of their own parents, 
which by this time they will think requires a very 
elaborate apology. It is only inhibited adults who 
feel that this long preface is necessary. To the child, 
if he is not corrupted by the prudery of his elders, 
sex seems a perfectly natural subject just like any 
other. If parents are unable themselves to speak 
naturally on this subject, they should have their 
children spoken to by someone less cramped by 
convention and inhibition. Before puberty there is 
no difficulty whatever in causing a child to remain 
natural about sex, and to view it exactly as he views 
other subjects. This is the ideal to be aimed at 
throughout life, but after puberty it becomes more 
difficult of attainment. But the difficulty, even after 
adolescence, will be very much less when children 
have been brought up sanely than when their minds 
have been filled with irrational terrors and taboos. 

The problems which arise with older boys and 
girls are difficult to treat apart from some positive 
sexual ethic. The usual view is that complete con- 
tinence should be aimed at, and cannot do any 
harm. In England, all hetero-sexual experience is 
prevented by segregation of the sexes, except in the 
case of a few unusually enterprising youths. There is 
consequently a tendency among the more enter- 
prising to homosexuality, and among the more 

123 



SEX IN EDUCATION 


timid to masturbation. Boys are told, and many of 
them believe, that these practices are wicked and 
harmful. They have to be furtive, since if discovered 
they are visited by severe punishment. Discovery is, 
of course, largely a matter of accident, and therefore 
punishment falls in an unjustly capricious way. But 
the fear of punishment and the practice of conceal- 
ment have of necessity a bad effect upon those who 
remain undetected. In public schools there is a 
tendency to sacrifice intelligence to virtue by keep- 
ing the boys so busy and so tired physically that they 
will have neither leisure nor inclination for sex. The 
existing system thus has the following disadvantages : 
first, it plants superstitious terrors in the minds of 
boys; secondly, it causes a large percentage to 
become timid hypocrites ; thirdly, it makes thought 
and feeling on sexual subjects obscene and sur- 
reptitious; fourthly, it causes scientific curiosity to 
appear sinful, so that it either decays or becomes 
morbid; fifthly, it leads to the discouragement of 
leisure, and therefore of intellectual growth. 

In spite of these evils of the present system, it is 
not easy, short of a complete change in the whole 
moral code, to imagine any system free from grave 
objections. From puberty to marriage is, with most 
men in the modem community, a considerable 
stretch of years. Even assuming it to be desirable 
that they should spend these years in complete con- 
tinence, it is certain that most men will not do so.* 
Yet so long as the present moral code persist, they 

123 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

can hardly infringe it without some damage. To go 
with prostitutes is a bad thing, first on account of 
the danger of disease, secondly, because prostitution 
is an undesirable profession, at any rate so long as 
prostitutes are looked down upon, thirdly, because 
if a man’s first experiences of sex are mercenary and 
devoid of all sentiment, he is likely when he comes 
to marriage to view his wife either as a prostitute or 
as a saint, neither of which is likely to lead to 
happiness. Masturbation after puberty, while it does 
not do as much harm as conventional moralists 
pretend, undoubtedly has certain grave evils. It 
tends to make a man self-centred and unadven- 
turous, and sometimes it makes him incapable of 
normal intercourse. It is possible that homosexual 
relations with other boys would not be very harmful 
if they were tolerated, but even then there is the 
danger lest they should interfere with the growth of 
normal sexual life later on. If the sexes are not 
segregated, there is likely to be a good deal of inter- 
course between girls and boys, which will not only 
interfere gravely with education, but will cause 
pregnancies at an age when they are undesirable. 
I do not think that in the present state of society and 
public opinion there is any solution to this problem. 
Perhaps a time will come when the psychological 
disorders caused in adolescence by our present code 
will be taken so seriously that boys and girls will be 
allowed the kind of freedom at present allowed in 
Samoa and various other Pacific islands. If this ever 


124 



SEX IN EDUCATION 


comes to be a practice, it will be necessary to give 
instruction in contraception, and to interrupt preg- 
nancies at once if they nevertheless occur. I cannot 
say that I like such a prospect, and perhaps it may 
be found that continence during the years of adoles- 
cence would impose no intolerable burden if there 
were a prospect that the necessity for it would ceeise 
at about the age of twenty. This could be secured 
by Judge Lindsey’s system of companionate mar- 
riage. I am sure that university life would be better, 
both intellectually and morally, if most university 
students had temporary childless marriages. This 
would afford a solution of the sexual urge neither 
restless nor surreptitious, neither mercenary nor 
casual, and of such a nature that it need not take up 
time which ought to be given to work. 

Before puberty the question of sex in education 
can be treated on lines of mental hygiene without 
the necessity of forming any very definite judgement 
on sexual ethics. But it is difficult to decide how sex 
should be treated in the later years of school and at 
the university unless we have fairly clear opinions 
as to what we think desirable and what undesirable 
in sexual behaviour. The sexual ethic of most people 
at the present time is a confused jumble derived 
from three main sources: first, the insistence upon 
the virtue of wives which is necessary for the institu- 
tion of the patriarchal family ; second, the Christian 
doctrine that all sex outside marriage is sin ; and ’ 
third, the entirely modern doctrine of the equality 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

of women. Of these three elements, that derived 
from the patriarchal family is the oldest. It can be 
seen at the present day in Japan without the other 
two. The Japanese are very free from all sex taboos, 
and their sexual morality contains little that is 
superstitious. There is no pretence of sex equality, 
and women are kept strictly subordinate to men. 
The patriarchal family is very firmly established, 
and is enforced by the subjection of wives rather 
than abstract moral teaching. Young children are 
allowed sexual knowledge, sexual conversation, and 
sexual play to a degree which is astonishing to a 
European. The morality of adult life is one applying 
only to women, and imposed upon them ruthlessly 
by the superior power of men. This is an ancient 
system which was nearly universal in pre-Christian 
civilizations. 

Early Christianity introduced the belief that there 
is something inherently impure about sex, so that 
it can only be excused by the necessity of propa- 
gating the human race, and even when confined to 
marriage is scarcely so honourable as continence. I 
do not mean to say that no such feeling existed 
before the rise of Christianity : there is some element 
in human nature which makes men prone to anti- 
sexual feelings, and it was to these already existing 
elements that Christianity appealed. The Jews had 
had strong sexual taboos, but had not had any 
feeling of the impurity of sex as such, though traces 
of the rise of this feeling are to be found in the 

126 



SEX IN EDUCATION 


Apocrypha. The Christian ethic, for the first time 
in history, was theoretically equal as between men 
and women, although in practice departures from 
virtue were regarded more leniently in the case of 
men than in the case of women. Christian practice 
thus came to be not so very different from that of 
pre-Christian patriarchal civilizations, though there 
remained a great psychological difference in the fact 
that men’s sexual freedoms were regarded as sins. 

With the advent of the doctrine of sex equality, 
this system broke down. Either men must become as 
virtuous as women, as the pioneers of feminism 
hoped, or women must be allowed to be as unvir- 
tuous as men, as the feminists of our generation tend 
to urge. But if virtue is not demanded of women, it 
is difficult to see how the patriarchal family can be 
maintained, and to abandon the patriarchal family 
would involve profound changes in the social 
structure. There is thus a confusion. Christian ethics 
have always been too severe for male human nature, 
and if women are to be as free as men they also will 
find Christian ethics intolerably severe. The family 
is a very deeply rooted institution, which men will 
not willingly see transformed. From this confusion 
there seems only one clear issue, which is that the 
place of the father should be taken by the State — a 
system which is easily possible under Communism, 
but not so easy to adapt to the institutions of private 
property and inheritance. In this way the question 
of private property becomes bound up with the 

127 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

question of sexual morals. It cannot be expected 
that a man will work to support children who may 
not be his, and therefore the system of private 
property, combined with the patriarchal family, 
involves a certain degree of virtue in wives. To 
demand virtue of wives, but not of husbands, is 
contrary to the doctrine of sex equality, and it is 
difficult to see how virtue is to be secured without 
either tyranny or taboo. I have little doubt that the 
solution will be found in the greatly diminishing 
importance of the father and an increasing tendency 
for children to be supported by the State rather than 
by their fathers. I am not at all sure that this will be 
a good thing. The sentiment of paternity, and the 
feeling of sons towards their fathers, have been pro- 
foundly important elements in the history of civili- 
zation, and I do not profess to know what civiliza- 
tion will be like without these elements. But whether 
for good or evil, the importance of the State in 
relation to children seems bound to increase, while 
the importance of the father will correspondingly 
diminish. 

Of all these modern problems and confusions, 
those who are concerned with the education of the 
young refuse to take any notice. They hold that the 
rigid Christian ethic, even if it cannot be enforced 
upon adults, can and should govern the attitude of 
those who have the care of the young. The moral 
attitude of schools and of British Universities re- 
mains much more rigid than that of the world at 

138 



SEX IN EDUCATION 


lai^c, with the result that education becomes in- 
creasingly out of touch with the society for which 
it is supposed to be preparing young people. While 
public opinion and social institutions remzdn what 
they are, I do not think that any clear-cut solution 
is possible, because of the fundamental incompati- 
bility between sex equality and the patriarchal 
family. In spite of this incompatibility, however, a 
good deal can be decided by general ethical prin- 
ciples, and by the refusal to treat sex in a super- 
stitious manner. 

It should be an absolute principle in all dealings 
with the young not to tell them edifying lies. It 
should be an absolute principle that every subject 
is open to rational debate, and to consideration in 
a scientific manner. If the preservation of the patri- 
archal family is to be the basis of morals, it is diffi- 
cult to see how from this basis to deduce the sinful- 
ness of such sexual practices as cannot lead to 
offspring, although it is these, more than any 
others, that are viewed with horror, not only by 
Christian ethics, but also by the criminal law. It 
should be realized also that even when a certain 
kind of conduct is in itself desirable, it may not be 
desirable to enforce it by a very rigid discipline, or 
by the creation of morbid terrors. These principles 
cover a considerable part of the moral education of 
the young. For the rest, I think we must wait until 
our chaotic and rapidly changing society has 
developed into some more stable form. 


I 


129 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

It is important in all dealings with the young to 
prevent them from acquiring the notion that sex is 
something inherently nasty and furtive. Sex is an 
interesting subject, and it is natural to human 
beings to think and talk about it. At present, this 
entirely natural desire on the part of the young is 
treated by the authorities as something wicked, with 
the result that the young acquire even more interest 
in the subject than they would naturally have, and 
converse about it continually with all the pleasure 
of forbidden fruit. Their conversation is necessarily 
ignorant and foolish, because they are left to their 
own guesses and their own half-knowledge. The 
whole subject of sex becomes to most boys a matter 
of sniggering and dirty stories. The whole concep- 
tion of sex as a matter of natural delight, rising on 
occasion to poetry, sometimes light-hearted and 
gay, sometimes passionate with a tragic profundity, 
lies outside the purview of the pedagogic moralists, 
to whom sex is wicked when it is combined with 
delight, and virtuous only when it is drab and 
habitual. Poetry and joy and beauty are thrust out 
of life by this morality of ugliness, and something 
stark and rigid is brought into all human relation- 
ships. From this outlook come prudery and petty- 
mindedness and the death of imagination. It may 
be that a freer outlook also has its dangers. But they 
are the dangers of life, not of death. 


130 



CHAPTER X 


PATRIOTISM IN EDUCATION 

Every man has a number of purposes and desires, 
some purely personal, others of a sort which he can 
share with many other men. Most men desire 
money, for example, and most ways of growing 
rich involve co-operation with some group. The 
group concerned depends upon the particular way 
of growing rich. For most purposes, two different 
firms in the same business are rivals, but for purposes 
of a protective tariff they co-operate. Money, of 
course, is not the only thing for which people fall 
into groups of a political kind. They are organized 
into churches, brotherhoods, learned societies, free- 
masons, and what not. The motives which lead men 
to co-operate are many : identity of interest is one ; 
identity of opinion is another ; and ties of blood are 
yet a third. The Rothschild family co-operated 
owing to ties of blood. They did not need formal 
articles of incorporation, because they could trust 
each other, and a great part of their success was due 
to the fact that there was a Rothschild in every 
important financial centre in Europe. A form of 
co-operation based upon identity of opinion is to be 
seen in the philanthropic work of the Quakers after 
the war. They were able to work together easily 
because of their similarity of outlook. Ties of self- 

> 3 * 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

interest are the basis of such organizations as joint- 
stock companies and trade-unions. 

A group of men organized for a purpose has 
collectively only that purpose for the sake of which 
the organization exists. Its mentality is therefore 
simpler and cruder than that of any individual. The 
Society for Psychical Research, let us say, cares 
only for psychical research, though each of its 
members cares for many other things. The Federa- 
tion of British Industries cares only about British 
industries, although its individual members may 
enjoy going to the play or watching a cricket 
match. A family as a whole cares only about the 
family fortunes, and is frequently willing to sacrifice 
individual members to this end. 

Passions which are politically organized are much 
more powerful than those which remain unorgan- 
ized. The people who wish to go to cinemas on 
Sundays are a totally unorganized crowd, and are 
politically of little account. The Sabbatarians who 
wish them not to go are organized, and have politi- 
cal influence. The cinema proprietors also are 
organized. From a political point of view, therefore, 
the question of the Sunday opening of cinemas is a 
conflict between cinema proprietors and Sabba- 
tarians, in which the wishes of the general public do 
not count. 

A given man may belong to a number of organi- 
zations, some useful, some harmful, some merely 
innocent. He belongs, let us say, to the British 

13a 



PATRIOTISM IN EDUCATION 

Fascists, to the football club in his village, and to a 
society for anthropological research. In the third 
capacity he is laudable, in the second innocent, and 
in the first abominable. He himself is a mixture of 
good and bad, but the organizations have an un- 
mixed ethical character for good or evil which is 
not to be found in their members. It is the purpose 
for which men are organized which determines 
whether an organization is good or bad, not the 
character of the men composing the organization. 

These somewhat trite remarks are intended to 
lead up to the curious results which flow from the 
organization of men into States. In almost all 
civilized countries, the State is the most powerful of 
the organizations to which a man belongs, so that 
his purposes qua member of a State are much more 
effective politically than any of his other purposes. 
It becomes important, therefore, to consider what 
the purposes of the modem State are. 

The functions of the State are partly internal, 
partly external. For this purpose I include local 
government among the functions of a State. One 
may say, broadly speaking, that the internal pur- 
poses of the State are good, while its external pur- 
poses are bad. This statement is, of course, too 
simple to be literally true, but it represents a useful 
first approximation. The internal purposes of the 
State include such matters as roads, lighting, educa- 
tion, the police, the law, the post-office, and so on. 
One may quarrel with this or that detail of adminis- 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

tration, but only an anarchist will hold that such 
purposes are in themselves undesirable. So far as 
its internal activities are concerned, therefore, the 
State, on the whole, deserves the loyalty and support 
of its citizens. 

When we come to its external purposes the matter 
is otherwise. In relation to the rest of the world, the 
purposes of a great State are two: defence against 
aggression, and the support of its citizens in foreign 
exploitation. Defence against aggression, in so far as 
it is genuine and needed to prevent invasion, may 
be allowed to be prima facie useful. But the difficulty 
is that the very same means which are required to 
prevent invasion are also convenient for foreign 
exploitation. The leading States of the world aim at 
drawing an economic tribute from the labour and 
the mineral wealth of less powerful countries, and 
employ in securing this tribute the armed forces of 
which the nominal purpose is defensive. When, for 
example, the Transvaal was found to contain gold, 
the British invaded it. Lord Salisbury assured the 
nation that “we seek no goldfields.” But somehow 
or other we happened to go where goldfields were, 
and to find ourselves in possession of them at the 
end of the war. To take another illustration : every- 
body knows that the British went to Southern Persia 
from a desire to benefit the Southern Persians, but 
it is doubtful whether we should have taiken so 
much interest in their welfare if they had not 
inhabited a country full of oil. Not dissimilar re- 



PATRIOTISM IN EDUCATION 

marks might be made about some of the doings 
of the United States in Central America. In like 
manner, the motives of Japan in going to Man- 
churia are, of course, the noblest possible; but they 
happen, by some curious accident, to coincide with 
the interests of the Japanese. 

It is not too much to say that most of the external 
activities of powerful States in the present day are 
concerned with the employment, or the threat, of 
armed forces, for the purpose of taking away from 
the less powerful wealth which legally belongs to 
them. Activities of this sort on the part of private 
individuals are considered criminal, and are pun- 
ished by law unless they are on a very large scale. 
But on the part of nations, they are considered 
admirable by the citizens of the nations concerned. 

This brings me at last to the subject of the present 
chapter, namely, the teaching of patriotism in 
schools. In order to judge of this teaching it is 
necessary to be clear not only as to its intentions, 
but also as to its actual effects. Patriotism, in inten- 
tion, and in the thoughts of those who advocate it, 
is a thing which is very largely good. Love of home, 
love of one’s native country, even a certain degree 
of pride in its historical achievements, in so far as 
these are deserving of pride, is not to be deprecated. 
It is a complex sentiment, partly concerned with 
actual love of the soil and of familiar surroundings, 
partly with something analogous to an extended 
love of family. The root of the sentiment is partly 

135 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

geographical and partly biological. But this primi- 
tive feeling is not in itself either political or eco- 
nomic. It is a feeling for one’s own country, not 
against other countries. In its primitive form it is 
hardly to be found except among those who live in 
rural surroundings without much travel. The town- 
dweller who is perpetually changing his habitation, 
and has no piece of land that he can call his own, 
has much less of the primitive sentiment out of 
which patriotism grows than has the rural land- 
owner or peasant. The town-dweller has, instead, a 
sentiment largely artificial, largely the product of 
his education and his newspapers, and almost 
wholly harmful. This sentiment is not so much love 
of home and of compatriots as hatred of foreigners 
and desire to appropriate foreign countries. Like 
almost all bad sentiments, it is disguised as loyalty. 
If you wish a man to commit some abominable 
crime, from which he would naturally recoil in 
horror, you first teach him loyalty to a gang of 
arch-criminals, and then make his crime appear to 
him as exemplifying the virtue of loyalty. Of this 
process, patriotism is the most perfect instance. 
Take, for example, reverence for the flag. The flag 
is the symbol for the nation in its martial capacity. 
It suggests battle, war, conquest, and deeds of 
heroism. The British flag suggests to a Briton Nelson 
and Trafalgar, not Shakespeare or Newton or 
Darwin. Things which have been done by English- 
men to further the civilization of mankind have not 
136 



PATRIOTISM IN EDUCATION 

been done under the symbol of the flag, and are not 
called to mind when that symbol is venerated. The 
best deeds of Englishmen have been done by them 
not as Englishmen, but as individuzds. The deeds 
which Englishmen do with the consciousness of 
being Englishmen, and because they are English- 
men, are of a less admirable sort. But it is these deeds 
that the flag calls upon us to admire. And what is 
true of the British flag is equally true of the Stars 
and Stripes, or of the flag of any powerful nation. 

Throughout the Western world boys and girls are 
taught that their most important social loyalty is to 
the State of which they are citizens, and that their 
duty to the State is to act as its government may 
direct. Lest they should question this doctrine, they 
are taught false history, false politics, false eco- 
nomics. They are informed of the misdeeds of 
foreign States, but not of the misdeeds of their own 
State. They are led to suppose that all the wars in 
which their own State has engaged are wars of 
defence, while the wars of foreign States are wars of 
aggression. They are taught to believe that when, 
contrary to expectation, their own country does 
conquer some foreign country, it does so in order to 
spread civilization, or the light of the gospel, or a 
lofty moral tone, or prohibition, or something else 
which is equally noble. They are taught to believe 
that foreign nations have no moral standards, and, 
as the British national anthem asserts, that it is 
the duty of Providence to “frustrate their knavish 

137 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

tricks” — a duty in which Providence will not dis- 
dain to employ us as its instruments. The fact is 
that every nation, in its dealings with every other, 
commits as many crimes as its armed forces render 
possible. Citizens, even decent citizens, give a full 
assent to the activities which make these crimes 
possible, because they do not know what is being 
done, or see the facts in a true perspective. 

For this willingness of the ordinary citizen to 
become an unconscious accomplice in murder for 
the saike of robbery, education is chiefly to blame. 
There are those who blame the Press, but in this I 
think they are mistaken. The Press is such as the 
public demands, and the public demands bad news- 
papers because it has been badly educated. Patriot- 
ism of the nationalistic type, so far from being taught 
in schools, ought to be mentioned as a form of mass- 
hysteria to which men are unfortunately liable, and 
against which they need to be fortified both intellec- 
tually and morally. Nationalism is imdoubtedly the 
most dangerous vice of our time — far more dangerous 
than drunkenness, or drugs, or commercial dis- 
honesty, or any of the other vices against which a 
conventional moral education is directed. All who 
are capable of a survey of the modern world are 
aware that, owing to nationalism, the continuance 
of a civilized way of life is in jeopardy. This, I say, 
is generally known to all persons who are well- 
informed as to international affairs. Nevertheless, 
everywhere public money continues to be spent in 

138 



PATRIOTISM IN EDUCATION 

propagating and intensifying this destructive vice. 
Those who consider that children should not be 
taught to regard wholesale slaughter as the noblest 
work of man are denounced as renegades, and 
friends of every country but their own. One would 
have supposed that natural affection would cause 
many people to feel pain in the thought of their 
children dying in agony. Such is not the case. 
Although the danger is patent, all attempts to cope 
with it are viewed as wicked by most of the holders 
of power in most countries. Military service is 
represented as a noble preparation for the defence 
of one’s own country, and not a word is said to 
make young people aware that the military opera- 
tions of their own country, supposing it to be a 
powerful one, are much more likely to consist of 
foreign aggression than of home defence. 

The objections to patriotic teaching are various. 
There is the objection which we have already con- 
sidered that, unless the virulence of nationalism can 
be abated, civilization cannot continue. There is 
the objection that it is hardly possible to teach 
civilized human ideals of conduct in an institution 
which also teaches people how to kill. There is the 
objection that the teaching of hatred, which is a 
necessary part of a nationalistic education, is in 
itself a bad thing. But over and above all these, 
there is the purely intellectual objection that the 
teaching of nationalism involves the teaching of 
false propositions. In every country of the world, 

139 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

children are taught that their country is the best, 
and in every country except one this proposition is 
false. Since the nations cannot agree as to which is 
the one where it is true, it would be better to give 
up the habit of emphasizing the merits of one nation 
at the expense of every other. The idea that what is 
taught to children should, if possible, be true is, I 
know, very subversive, and in some of its applica- 
tions even illegal. But I cannot resist the conviction 
that instruction is better when it teaches truth than 
when it teaches falsehood. History ought to be 
taught in exactly the same way in all countries of 
the world, and history text-books ought to be drawn 
up by the League of Nations, with an assistant from 
the United States, and another from Soviet Russia. 
History should be world history rather than national 
history, and should emphasize matters of cultural 
importance rather than wars. In so far as wars must 
be taught, they should not be taught only from the 
point of view of the victor, and of heroic deeds. The 
pupil should linger on the battle-field among the 
wounded, should be made to feel the plight of the 
homeless in devastated regions, and should be made 
aware of all the cruelties and injustices for which 
war affords an opportunity. At present almost all 
the teaching is of a sort to glorify war. Against the 
teaching of the schools, the labours of pacifists are 
vain. This, of course, applies especially to schools for 
the rich, which are everywhere morally and intel- 
lectually inferior to schools for the poor. Children 
140 



PATRIOTISM IN EDUCATION 

leam in school the faults of other nations, but not 
the faults of their own. To know the faults of other 
nations ministers only to self-righteousness and war- 
like feeling, whereas to know the faults of one’s own 
nation is salutary. What English boy is taught in 
school the truth about the Black and Tans in 
Ireland? What French boy is taught the truth about 
the occupation of the Ruhr by coloured troops? 
What American boy is taught the facts about Sacco 
and Vanzetti, or Mooney and Billings? Owing to 
such omissions, the ordinary citizen of every civilized 
country is wrapped in self-complacency. He knows 
about other nations all the things they do not know 
about themselves; but the things they know about 
his country, he does not knov/. 

Most of the teaching of patriotism, while intellec- 
tually misguided, is morally innocent. The men who 
teach have themselves been taught on a wrong 
system, and have learned to feel that, in a world 
where foreigners are so wicked, only great military 
efforts can preserve their own country from disaster. 
There is, however, a less innocent side to patriotic 
propaganda. There are interests which make money 
out of it, not only armament interests, but also those 
who have investments in what are called undeveloped 
countries. If you possess, let us say, oil in some 
rather unsettled country, the expense of getting the 
oil consists of two parts — first, the technical, straight- 
forward expense of extracting it, and second, tlje 
political or military expense of keeping the “natives” 

141 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

in order. Only the former part of the expense falls 
upon you; the second part of the expense, which 
may be much greater, falls upon the tax-payer, who 
is induced to undertake it by means of patriotic 
propaganda. In this way, a highly undesirable con- 
nection grows up between patriotism and finance. 
This again is a fact which the young are carefully 
prevented from knowing. 

Patriotism in its more militant forms is intimately 
bound up with money. The armed forces of the 
State can be, and are, employed for the enrichment 
of its citizens. This is done partly by exacting tribute 
or indemnities, partly by insisting upon the payment 
of debts which would otherwise be repudiated, partly 
by the seizure of raw materials, and partly by 
means of compulsory commercial treaties. If the 
whole process were not covered by the glamour of 
patriotism, its sordidness and wickedness would be 
evident to all sane people. Education could easily, if 
men chose, produce a sense of the solidarity of the 
human race, and of the importance of international 
co-operation. Within a generation, the vehement 
nationalism from which the world is suffering could 
be extinguished. Within a generation, the tariff 
walls by which we are all making ourselves poor 
could be lowered, the armaments with which we 
are threatening ourselves with death could be 
abolished, and the spite ^vith which we are cutting 
off our own noses could be replaced by goodwill. 
The nationalism which is now everywhere rampant 
14a 



PATRIOTISM IN EDUCATION 

is mainly a product of the schools, and if it is to be 
brought to an end, a different spirit must pervade 
education. 

This matter, like disarmament, will have to be 
dealt with by international agreement. Perhaps the 
League of Nations, if it can spare any time from the 
whitewashing of aggressors, may sooner or later 
become aware of the importance of this matter. 
Perhaps the governments may agree to a uniform 
teaching of history. Perhaps after the next, great 
war, the survivors, if any, may come together and 
decide to substitute the flag of the League of Nations 
for their several national flags. But no doubt these 
are Utopian dreams. It is the nature of teachers to 
teach what they know, however little that may be. 
Imagine English teachers of history threatened by 
an international agreement with the necessity of 
teaching world history. They would have to find out 
the date of the Hegira and when Constantinople fell. 
They would have to learn about Jenghiz Khan and 
Ivan the Terrible, about how the mariner’s compass 
spread from China to the Arab sailors, and how the 
Greeks were the first to make statues of the Buddha. 
Their indignation at having such demands made 
upon their time would know no bounds, and they 
would agitate for a new government pledged to 
flout the League of Nations. The active energy of 
our time throughout the Western world is in capi- 
talist enterprise, and is, on the whole, a force making 
for destruction. The classes of men who should make 


143 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

for something better, such as teachers, are for the 
most part fairly content with the status quo. Any 
social amelioration would involve a change in their 
lessons, and has on that account to be avoided if 
possible. The effort that they wish to avoid is not 
only intellectual, but also emotional. Familiar emo- 
tions come easily, and it is difficult to teach oneself 
to feel new emotions on a familiar occasion, such as 
the playing of the national anthem. And thus our 
modern world, where the good are lazy and only 
the bad are energetic, goes reeling drunkenly to- 
wards destruction. At moments men see the abyss, 
but the intoxication of unreal sentiments soon closes 
their eyes. To all who are not intoxicated, the 
danger is clear. And nationalism is the chief force 
impelling our civilization to its doom. 

Note. — The present situation as regards national- 
ism in State schools in England is illustrated by the 
recent dismissal of Miss Beryl Aylward from her 
position as teacher at Coventry because she refused 
to salute the flag on Empire Day. She stated that, 
being a Quaker, she held the glorification of one’s 
own country to be not conducive to international 
good will. It appears, therefore, that no conscientious 
Quaker or pacifist can hold a post as teacher in an 
English State school. 


144 



CHAPTER XI 


CLASS-FEELING IN EDUCATION 

Ever since the dawn of civilization, class inequality 
has existed. Among savage tribes at the present day, 
it takes very simple forms. There are chiefs, and the 
chiefs are able to have several wives. Savages, unlike 
civilized men, have found a way of making wives a 
source of wealth, so that the more wives a man has 
the wealthier he becomes. But this primitive form of 
social inequality soon gave way to others more 
complex. In the main, social inequality has been 
bound up with inheritance, and therefore, in all 
patriarchal societies, with descent in the male line. 
Originally, the greater wealth of certain persons was 
due to military prowess. The successful fighter ac- 
quired wealth, and transmitted it to his sons. Wealth 
acquired by the sword usually consisted of land, and 
to this day land-owning is the mark of the aristo- 
crat, the aristocrat being in theory the descendant 
of some feudal baron, who acquired his lands by 
killing the previous occupant and holding his 
acquisition against all comers. This is considered 
the most honourable source of wealth. There are 
others slightly less honourable, exemplified by those 
who, while completely idle themselves, have ac- 
quired their wealth by inheritance from an indus- 
trious ancestor ; and yet others, still less respectable, 

K 145 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

whose wealth is due to their own industry. In the 
modem world, the plutocrat who, though rich, still 
works, is gradually ousting the aristocrat, whose 
income was in theory derived solely from ownership 
of land and natural monopolies. There have been 
two main legal sources of property : one, the aristo- 
cratic source, namely, ownership of land ; the other, 
the bourgeois source, namely, the right to the pro- 
duce of one’s own labour. The right to the produce 
of one’s own labour has always existed only on paper, 
because things are made out of other things, and 
the man who supplies the raw material exacts a 
right to the finished product in return for wages, 
or, where slavery exists, in return for the bare 
necessaries of life. We have thus three orders of 
men — the land-owner, the capitalist, and the prole- 
tarian. The capitalist in origin is merely a man 
whose savings have enabled him to buy the raw 
materials and the tools required in manufacturing, 
and who has thereby acquired the right to the 
finished product in return for wages. The three 
categories of land-owner, capitalist, and proletarian 
are clear enough in theory ; but in practice the dis- 
tinctions are blurred. A land-owner may employ 
business methods in developing a seaside resort 
which happens to be upon his property. A capitalist 
whose money is derived from manufacture may invest 
the whole or part of his fortune in land, and take to 
living upon rent. A proletarian, in so far as he has 
money in the savings bank, or a house which he is 
146 



CLASS-FEELING IN EDUCATION 

buying on the instalment plan, becomes to that 
extent a capitalist or a land-owner as the case may 
be. The eminent barrister who charges a thousand 
guineas for a brief should, in strict economics, be 
classified as a proletarian. But he would be indig- 
nant if this were done, and has the mentality of a 
plutocrat. 

From a practical point of view, the important 
class distinctions outside the U.S.S.R. depend upon 
the patriarchal family and the practice of inheri- 
tance. Owing to the patriarchal family, the children 
of the rich get a different education, though not 
always a better one, than is given to the children of 
the poor. Owing to inheritance, the children of the 
rich may look forward, if they so desire, to idleness 
without starvation. If there were no such thing as 
inheritance, the inequalities of wealth which would 
survive would be obliterated in each generation. 
And if there were no such thing as the patriarchal 
family, the children of the rich would not be edu- 
cated differently from the children of the poor. 
Socialists are apt to speak of the capitalist system 
in a somewhat vague way, without an adequate 
analysis of the different factors which contribute to 
it. The business activities of the capitalist are by no 
means the whole of the capitalist system. The fact 
that his children are in a privileged position owing 
to his wealth is an essential part of it. I do not mean 
this as a criticism of Marxism, since Marx realized 
the connection between economics and the family. 

*47 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

But I do say it in criticism of a good mamy English- 
speaking Socialists, who imagine that the economic 
structure of society has no very vital connection 
with marriage and the family. As a matter of fact, 
the connection is reciprocal. The bourgeois who is 
concerned in amassing private property applies the 
conception of private property to his wife and 
children, and has in consequence a certain way of 
feeling in regard to them. Conversely, sexual 
jealousy and paternal affection are emotions leading 
men to desire private property in women and 
children. And from their desire for this form of 
private property they are led to desire other forms 
also. In a primitive community, a man may desire 
wealth in order to have many wives. In a civilized 
community, one of the reasons for desiring wealth is 
to be able to give a better social status to one’s wife 
and children than belongs to the wives and children 
of wage-earners. The connection of private property 
in material things with private property in women 
and children is thus reciprocal. It cannot be ex- 
pected that one will break down without the other 
also breaking down. Private property in women and 
children introduces rivalry in regard to them, and 
thus brings the motive of class distinction into 
education. How all these matters would be affected 
by a thoroughgoing communism I do not propose 
to consider at this stage. 

Where education is concerned it is, of course, the 
social position of the fathers that determines that of 

148 



CLASS-FEELING IN EDUCATION 

the children. Thus in any society in which class 
distinctions exist, children are respected not solely 
on account of their own merits, but also on account 
of the wealth of their fathers. The children of the 
rich acquire a belief that they are superior to the 
children of the poor, and an attempt is made to 
cause the children of the poor to think themselves 
inferior to the children of the rich. It is necessary to 
make this effort with the children of the poor, since 
otherwise they might come to resent the injustice of 
which they are the victims. Consequently, wherever 
class distinctions exist, education necessarily has two 
correlative defects : that of producing arrogance in 
the rich, and that of aiming at irrational humility 
in the poor. The objections to the arrogance of the 
rich are obvious, and have been pointed out by the 
moralists from the time of the Hebrew prophets 
downwards, though only a small percentage of the 
moralists have noticed that the evil could not be 
undone by mere preaching, but only by a different 
economic system. The evils of attempting to produce 
irrational humility in the poor are somewhat 
different. If it is produced, initiative and self-respect 
are harmfully diminished. If it is not produced, there 
is resentment tending to destructiveness. Whether it 
is produced or whether it is not, the attempt to pro- 
duce it involves the teaching of falsehood ; ethical 
falsehood, since it is a representation that the 
inequality of the rich and the poor is not an in- 
justice; economic falsehood, since it is suggested 

149 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

that the present economic system is the best possible ; 
historical falsehood, since the previous conflicts of 
rich and poor are narrated from the standpoint of 
the rich. When the teachers are little better than 
proletarians themselves, they need slavish souls if 
they are to believe what they have to teach, and lack 
of courage if they are to teach it without believing it. 

In pre-industrial societies, where wealth is mainly 
aristocratic, the defence of inequality takes the form 
of reverence for birth, which often overrides the 
reverence for actual wealth, and conceals the eco- 
nomic origin of the sentiment. A penniless exiled 
chieftain may be more respected than a successful 
money-lender. Nevertheless, fundamentally it is 
wealth that is respected, because as a rule in such 
societies it is aristocratic descent which is the source 
of wealth. Where aristocracy is strong, belief in it is, 
of course, bolstered up by all kinds of nonsense, 
such as that aristocrats have better manners, more 
education, or finer feelings than other people. In a 
plutocratic society, such as that of the United 
States, there is a different form of humbug. The 
successful plutocrat is supposed to have achieved his 
position by hard work, frugality, and scrupulous 
honesty. He is supposed to use his position as a 
public trust, with an eye always to the general good. 
In the sixties and seventies of the last century, when 
the great fortunes of plutocrats were a novelty, 
traditional culture, such as that of the Adams 
family, exposed with gusto the tricks and chicanery 
150 



CLASS-FEELING IN EDUCATION 

and sheer illegality by which many of the leading 
men had amassed their wealth,* Throughout the 
eighties and nineties, books were written against 
the methods of the Standard Oil Company. Nowa- 
days, this is all changed. The great plutocrats are 
regarded as great public benefactors. Every uni- 
versity has, or hopes to have, endowments from 
them. Every young man of academic tastes hopes 
to receive a research fellowship from the bounty of 
some philanthropic billionaire. The universities and 
the press are filled with the praise of the very rich, 
and the man in the street is taught to believe that 
virtue is proportional to income. Class distinctions 
are thus just as important in a country like the 
United States as they are in an aristocratic country, 
and a good deal more important than they are in 
countries such as Norway and Denmark, where 
there is diffused comfort with hardly any great 
fortunes. 

The harm done by class distinctions is not con- 
fined to the children. It extends to the teachers and 
the curriculum. More social prestige attaches to 
care of the mind than to care of the body, and there- 
fore the teacher who gives intellectual instruction 
is usually indifferent to questions of health, and 
ignorant of the signs by which the first approaches 
of any physical ailment can be detected. The dis- 
tinction between mind and body is artificial and 

* Sec High Finance in the Sixties , by the Brothers Adams. Reprinted 
by the Yale University Press. 

151 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

unreal ; but unfortunately it has had an effect upon 
the social hierarchy, with the result that care of the 
body and care of the mind are much more separated 
in education than they ought to be. This, of course, 
is nothing like as bad as it was in former days, when 
a deaf child might be punished for inattention for 
years on end without any of the teachers discovering 
that he was deaf. But although such extreme in- 
stances as this are not likely to occur nowadays, the 
evil still exists in less flagrant forms. The teacher, 
for example, knows nothing about the child’s 
digestive condition, and may be indignant at 
stupidity and bad temper for which the cause is to 
be found in constipation. If it were suggested to 
teachers that they should pay any attention to the 
bowel action of their pupils, their snobbery would 
be outraged. I do not wish the reader to mis- 
understand me at this point. I am not denying that 
in all modern schools there is physical care of 
children, and that a great deal is done to keep them 
in health, as compared with what used to be done 
in former times. What I am complaining of is that 
physical and mental care are so completely sepa- 
rated, and that the person who possesses the know- 
ledge required for the one has, as a rule, no inkling 
of the knowledge required for the other. In an adult 
there is a considerable gulf between mind and body, 
but this gulf has no metaphysical necessity. It is a 
product of education. In a baby there is no gulf, in 
an infant there is very little, and in a child not much. 
152 



CLASS-FEELING IN EDUCATION 

I do not suppose that a child of ten could give a 
very good philosophical account of the difference 
between mind and body. But every child would 
understand at once if you said: “Your mind is 
what is looked after by Miss A., and your body is 
what is looked after by Miss B.” It is the distinction 
between Miss A. and Miss B. that underlies the 
subsequent metaphysical distinction between mind 
and matter. If the functions of Miss A. and Miss B. 
were combined in a Miss C., all children would 
grow up to be neutral monists, believing that mind 
and matter are only different aspects of the same 
phenomenon. In this way, metaphysics is connected 
with the class system. Mental aetivity is that which 
does not involve the use of arms or legs. Physical 
activity is that which does. Mental activity is 
superior to physical, because those who practise it 
exclusively need servants to do their physical labours 
for them. It follows that the soul is nobler than the 
body, that matter is the evil principle, and so on. 

As regards the curriculum also, respect for wealth 
has had an effect, though this effect is less obvious 
than formerly. The Greeks, like all communities 
that employ slave labour, held the view that all 
manual work is vulgar. This led them to place a 
great emphasis upon such things as culture and 
philosophy and rhetoric, which could be studied 
without the use of the hands. They tended to thipk 
that all manipulation of matter was unworthy of a 
gentleman, and this probably had something to do 

153 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

with their partial lack of success in experimental 
science. Plutarch, relating the ingenious inventions 
of Archimedes during the siege of Syracuse, defends 
him from the charge of vulgarity on the ground that 
he was doing it for the benefit of his cousin the King. 
The Romans inherited the Greek view of culture, 
and down to our own day this view has been domi- 
nant in all countries of Western Europe. Culture is 
something which can be acquired by reading books, 
or by conversation. Whatever involves more than 
this is not culture in the Greek meaning of the term. 
And the Greek meaning of the term is still that 
adopted, at any rate in England, by most school- 
masters, many university teachers, and all old 
gentlemen with literary tastes. This applies not 
only to Greek and Roman antiquity, but also to 
modern history. It is considered more cultured to 
know about Horace Walpole than about Henry 
Cavendish, about Bolingbroke than about Robert 
Boyle, though in each case the latter was the more 
important man. All this is ultimately connected 
with the idea that a gentleman is one who does not 
use his hands unless it be in the noble art of war. A 
gentleman may use a sword, but should not use a 
typewriter. 

In matters of this sort, the United States is much 
ahead of Europe, owing to the fact that, in America, 
aristocracy was abolished with emphasis at a time 
when it still existed in every European country. But 
a new form of class distinction in education is 

*54 



CLASS-FEELING IN EDUCATION 

growing up, which is the distinction between busi- 
ness management and the technical processes of 
manufacture. The man engaged in business manage- 
ment is the aristocrat of the future, and the phrase 
“a great executive” has much the same connotations 
in modern America that the phrase “a great noble- 
man” had in the novels of Disraeli. The substitution 
of the great executive for the great nobleman as the 
type to be admired is having a considerable effect 
upon ideals of culture. A great nobleman, in the 
dithyrambic day-dreams of Disraeli, was, no doubt, 
a man possessed of power, but it was power which 
had come to him without his having had to seek it, 
and which he exercised somewhat lazily. He was 
possessed also of great wealth, but this, again, had 
come to him without exertion, and he affected to 
think little of it. The things upon which he prided 
himself were his exquisite manners, his knowledge 
of good wine, his familiarity with the great world of 
all civilized countries, his judgement in regard to 
Renaissance pictures, and his capacity for epigram. 
It may be said generally that the accomplishments 
of aristocrats were frivolous, but innocent. The 
accomplishments of the great executives of our own 
time are very different. They are men whose posi- 
tion has been achieved by their powerful will, and 
their capacity for judging other men. Power is their 
ruling passion, organizing is the activity in which 
they excel. They are men capable of doing the 
greatest good or the greatest harm, men who must 

155 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

be respected for their abilities and their importance, 
and loved or hated according to the nature of their 
work, but never viewed with indifference or con- 
descension. In an industrial world men of this type 
must come to the fore. In the U.S.S.R. men of this 
type are utilized by the State in ways which give 
scope for their abilities, without permitting the 
ruthless individualism of which they are allowed to 
be guilty in the capitalist world. But whether under 
capitalism or under communism, it is men of this 
type who must ultimately dominate an industrial 
civilization, and the difference between their men- 
tality and that of aristocrats of former times must 
have an important influence in making industrial 
culture different from that of feudal and commercial 
ages. 

The conception of “the education of a gentleman” 
has had a bad effect upon universities. Young people 
who are not exceptionally intellectual find it difficult 
in the years between eighteen and twenty-two to 
take very seriously the acquisition of academic 
knowledge, which is going to be of no direct use to 
them in later life. They tend, therefore, to be idle at 
the university, or if they work, to do so from mere 
thoughtless conscientiousness. For those whose pro- 
fession is going to be research, the universities are 
admirable, but for most of the rest they are too 
much out of touch with subsequent life. It is possible 
to spend the university years in the acquisition of 
knowledge which has some professional utility, but 

156 



CLASS-FEELING IN EDUCATION 

conservative academic types view this with horror. 

I think they are mistaken. I think many clever young 
men become vapid and cynical through the con- 
sciousness that their work has no real importance 
while they are at the university. This does not 
happen to those who are studying medicine or 
engineering or agriculture or any subject of which 
the utility is obvious. A gentleman is intended to be 
ornamental rather than useful, but in order to be 
adequately ornamental he has to be supplied with 
an unearned income. For those who will have to 
earn their living, it is hardly wise to attempt a form 
of education whose main purpose was to make 
idleness elegant. Pure learning as an ideal has its 
place in the life of the community, but only for 
those few who are going to devote their energies to 
research. For those who are going to be engaged in 
some other profession, it would be better to spend 
the last years of education in acquiring such know- 
ledge as would enable them to pursue their pro- 
fession with intelligence and breadth of outlook. 
There is no such thing nowadays as an all-round 
education, but there is a tendency, especially in 
England, to over-emphasize those elements in edu- 
cation which enable a man to talk with seeming 
intelligence. Moreover, knowledge acquired at the 
university, if it is quite unrelated to subsequent 
professional work, is likely to be soon forgotten. If 
professional men of forty were examined in the 
subjects that they had studied at the university, I 

157 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

am afraid it would be found that in most cases very 
little knowledge remained. Whereas, if they had 
studied something which enabled them to see their 
profession in relation to the life of the community, 
and to understand its social aspects, it is likely that 
their subsequent experiences would have supplied 
illustrations to what they had learned, and would 
therefore have caused the knowledge to remain in 
their minds. 

I have dealt hitherto with incidental disadvan- 
tages derived from class-distinctions, but I have 
only touched upon the greatest disadvantage, which 
is ethical. Wherever unjust inequalities exist, a man 
who profits by them tends to protect himself from a 
sense of guilt by theories suggesting that he is some 
way better than those who are less fortunate. These 
theories involve a limitation of sympathy, and 
opposition to justice, and a tendency to defend the 
status quo. They thus make the more fortunate 
members of the community into opponents of all 
progress; fear invades their souls, and they shrink 
timidly from all doctrines that they suspect of 
having a subversive tendency, and of being there- 
fore a threat to their own comfort. On the other 
hand, the less fortunate members of the community 
must either suffer such intellectual atrophy that 
they do not perceive the injustice of which they are 
the victims, and such moral loss of self-respect that 
they are willing to bow down before men intrinsi- 
cally no better than themselves, or they must be 
158 



CLASS-FEELING IN EDUCATION 

filled with anger and resentment, protesting indig- 
nantly, feeling a continual sense of grievance, and 
gradually coming to view the world through the 
jaundiced eyes of the victim of persecution mania. 
All tolerated injustice has thus two bad sides: one 
as regards the fortunate, and the other as regards 
the unfortunate. It is for these reasons rather than 
from any abstract excellence in justice for its own 
sake that unjust social systems are evil. In a com- 
munity based upon injustice, the ethical side of 
education can never be what it should be. Emotions 
of resentment which, considered in themselves, are 
bad, may be a very necessary motive force in 
eliminating injustice, whether between classes, na- 
tions, or sexes. But they do not cease to be intrinsi- 
cally undesirable by being politically necessary. And 
it should be a touch-stone of the good society that, 
in it, the useful emotions will be those that are 
kindly, friendly, and constructive, rather than those 
that are angry and destructive. This consideration, 
if followed out, will lead us very far. But as our 
theme is education, I will leave it to the reader to 
carry the argument to its conclusion. 


>59 



CHAPTER XII 


COMPETITION IN EDUCATION 

Or the dominant ideals of the nineteenth century, 
some have survived into our age, and some have 
not. Those that have survived have, for the most 
part, a more restricted field of application in our 
day than they had a hundred years ago. And of 
these the ideal of competition is a good example. It 
is, I think, a mistake to regard the belief in com- 
petition as due to Darwinism. The opposite is really 
the case : it was Darwinism that was due to belief 
in competition. The modern biologist, while he still 
believes in evolution, has much less belief in com- 
petition as its motive force than Darwin had; and 
this change reflects the change which has come over 
the economic structure of society. Industrialism 
began with large numbers of small firms all com- 
peting against each other, and at first with very 
little help from the State, which was still agricul- 
tural and aristocratic. Early industrialists, therefore, 
believed in self-help, laisser faire, and competition. 
From industry, the idea of competition spread to 
other spheres. Darwin persuaded men that com- 
petition between different forms of life was the cause 
of evolutionary progress. Educationists became per- 
suaded that competition in the class-room was the 
best way to promote industry among the scholars. 
i6o 



COMPETITION IN EDUCATION 

Belief in free competition was used by employers as 
an argument against trade-unionism, and is still so 
used in the backward parts of America. But com- 
petition between capitalists gradually diminished. 
The tendency has been for the whole of one industry 
to combine nationally, so that competition has 
become mainly between nations, and much less 
than formerly between different firms within a 
given nation. Meantime, it has naturally been the 
endeavour of capitalists, while combining them- 
selves, to hinder combinations as much as they could 
where their employees were concerned. Their motto 
has been: “United we stand; divided they fall.” 
Free competition has thus been preserved as a Great 
Ideal in all provinces of human life, except in the 
activities of industrial magnates. Where the indus- 
trial magnates are concerned, the competition is 
national, and therefore takes the form of encouraging 
patriotism. 

In education, the ideal of competition has had 
two kinds of bad effects. On the one hand, it has 
led to the teaching of respect for competition as 
opposed to co-operation, especially in international 
affairs; and on the other hand, it has led to a vast 
system of competitiveness in the class-room, and in 
the endeavour to secure scholarships, and subse- 
quently in the search for jobs. This last stage has 
been somewhat softened, where wage-earners are con- 
cerned, by trade-unionism. But among professional 
men it has retained all its unmitigated severity. 

L l6l 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

One of the worst defects of the belief in com- 
petition in education is that it has led, especially 
with the best pupils, to a great deal of over-educa- 
tion. At the present day there is a dangerous 
tendency, in every country of Western Europe, 
though not in North or South America, to inflict 
upon young people so much education as to be 
damaging to imagination and intellect, and even 
to physical health. Unfortunately, it is the cleverest 
of the young who suffer most from this tendency: 
in each generation the best brains and the best 
imaginations are immolated upon the altar of the 
Great God Competition. To one who has, as I have 
had, experience at the university of some of the best 
minds of a generation, the damage done by over- 
strain in youth is heart-rending. The educational 
machine in the United States is in many ways 
inferior to those of Western Europe, but in this 
respect it is better than they are. Able young post- 
graduates in America seldom have the breadth of 
culture or the sheer extent of erudition that is to be 
found in the same class in Europe, but they have a 
love of knowledge, an enthusiasm for research, and 
a freshness of intellectual initiative which in Europe 
have usually given place to a bored and cynical 
correctness. To learn without ceasing to love 
learning is difficult, and of this difficulty European 
educators have not found the solution. 

The first thing the average educator sets to work 
to kill in the young is imagination. Imagination is 

162 



COMPETITION IN EDUCATION 

lawless, undisciplined, individual, and neither cor- 
rect nor incorrect; in all these respects it is incon- 
venient to the teacher, especially when competition 
requires a rigid order of merit. The problem of the 
right treatment of imagination is rendered more 
difficult by the fact that, in most children, it decays 
spontaneously as interest in the real world increases. 
Adults in whom imagination remains strong are 
those who have retained from childhood something 
of its emancipation from fact ; but if adult imagina- 
tion is to be valuable, its emancipation from fact 
must not spring from ignorance, but from a certain 
lack of slavishness. Farinata degli Uberti held Hell 
in great contempt, in spite of having to live there 
for ever. It is this attitude towards fact that is most 
likely to promote fruitful imagination in the adult. 

To pass to more concrete considerations, take 
such a matter as children’s drawing and painting. 
Most children, from about five years old to about 
eight, show considerable imagination of a pictorial 
kind if they are encouraged but otherwise left free. 
Some, though only a small minority, are capable of 
retaining the impulse to paint after they have be- 
come self-critical. But if they have been taught to 
copy carefully and to aim at accurate representa- 
tion, they become increasingly scientific rather than 
artistic, and their painting ceases to show any 
imagination. If this is to be avoided, they must not 
be shown how to draw correctly except when they 
themselves ask for instruction, and they must not be 

163 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

allowed to think that correctness constitutes merit. 
This is difficult for the teacher, since artistic excel- 
lence is a matter of opinion and individual taste, 
whereas accuracy is capable of objective tests. The 
social element in school education, the fact of being 
one of a class, tends, unless the teacher is very 
exceptional, to lead to emphasis upon socially veri- 
fiable excellences rather than upon such as depend 
upon personal quality. If personal quality is to be 
preserved, definite teaching must be reduced to a 
minimum, and criticism must never be carried to 
such lengths as to produce timidity in self-expression. 
But these maxims are not likely to lead to work that 
will be pleasing to an inspector. 

The same thing, at a slightly later age, applies to 
the teaching of literature. Teachers tend to teach too 
much, and to make up silly rules of style, such as 
that no sentence should begin with “and” or “but.” 
Definite rules of grammar must of course be ob- 
served, though even grammar is more elastic than 
most teachers suppose. Any child who wrote : 

And damned be him that first cries hold, enough 

would be reproached not only for profanity but 
also for bad grammar. In regard to literature, as in 
regard to painting, the danger is lest correctness 
should be substituted for artistic excellence. The 
teaching of literature should be confined to reading, 
and the reading should be intensive rather than 
extensive. It is good to know by heeirt things from 

164 



COMPETITION IN EDUCATION 

which one derives spontaneous pleasure, and it is 
totally useless, from the standpoint of education in 
literature, to read anything, however classiczd, 
which does not give actual delight to the reader. 
The literature that is read with avidity and known 
intimately moulds diction and style, whereas the 
literature that is read once coldly merely promotes 
pseudo-intelligent conversation. Pupils should, of 
course, write as well as read, but what they write 
should not be criticized, nor should they be shown 
how, in the teacher’s opinion, they might have 
written it better. So far as writing is concerned, 
there should be no teaching. 

Passing from imagination to intellect, we find 
somewhat similar considerations relevant, together 
with certain others connected with fatigue. Fatigue 
may be general or special ; the former is to be con- 
sidered in connection with health, but the latter 
should be borne in mind by all who are engaged in 
intellectual training. Readers may remember Pav- 
lov’s dog, who learnt to distinguish ellipses from 
circles. But as Pavlov gradually made the ellipses 
more nearly circular, there came at last a point — 
where the ratio of major and minor axes was 9 : 8 
— at which the dog’s powers of discrimination gave 
way, and after this he forgot all that he had pre- 
viously learnt on the subject of circles and ellipses. 
The same sort of thing happens to many boys and 
girls in school. If they are compelled to tackle prob- 
lems that are definitely beyond their powers, a kind 

165 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

of bewildered terror seizes hold of them, not only in 
relation to the particular problem in question, but 
also as regards all intellectually neighbouring terri- 
tory. Many people are bad at mathematical subjects 
all their lives because they started them too young. 
Of the capacities tested in school, the power of 
abstract reasoning is the latest to develop, as may 
be seen from the data collected in Piaget’s valuable 
book on Judgment and Reasoning in the Child. A 
pedagogue, unless he is very psychological and very 
experienced, cannot believe that children are as 
muddle-headed as they are: so long as the right 
verbal responses are obtained, it is supposed that 
the subject is understood. Arithmetic and mathe- 
matics generally are learnt at too early an age, 
with the result that, in regard to them, many pupils 
acquire the artificial stupidity of Pavlov’s canine 
student of geometry. To prevent this kind of mis- 
fortune, it is necessary that teachers should have 
some knowledge of psychology, considerable train- 
ing in the art of teaching, and a certain freedom to 
relax the curriculum where necessary. To know how 
to teach is at present thought desirable in those who 
teach the poor, but the sons of “gentlemen” are still 
taught by wholly untrained teachers. This is one of 
the impredictable results of snobbery. 

Fatigue damages the actual quality of the intel- 
lect, and is therefore very grave. Less disastrous, 
though still seriously harmful, is the discouragement 
of interest in intellectual things which results from 

166 



COMPETITION IN EDUCATION 

the fact that much of what is taught is (or at least 
seems) wholly useless. Take any average class of a 
hundred boys : I should guess that ninety of them 
learn only from fear of punishment, nine from a 
competitive desire for success, and one from love of 
knowledge. This lamentable state of affairs is not 
inevitable. By means of short hours, volvmtary 
lessons, and good teaching, it is possible to cause 
about 70 per cent, to learn from love of know- 
ledge. When this motive can be invoked, attention 
becomes willing and unstrained, with the result that 
fatigue is greatly diminished and memory greatly 
improved. Moreover, the acquisition of knowledge 
comes to be felt as a pleasure, with the consequence 
that it is likely to be continued after the period of 
formal education is ended. It will be found that more 
is learnt in the shorter hours of voluntary lessons 
than in the longer times of enforced and inattentive 
boredom. But the teacher must adapt the instruction 
to the pupils’ sense of what is worth knowing, and 
not attempt to bully them into an insincere pre- 
tence that ancient rubbish has some occult and 
mysterious value. 

Another intellectual defect of almost all teaching, 
except the highest grade of university tuition, is 
that it encourages docility and the belief that 
definite answers are known on questions which are 
legitimate matters of debate. I remember an occa- 
sion when a number of us were discussing which was 
the best of Shakespeare’s plays. Most of us were 

167 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

concerned in advancing arguments for unconven- 
tional opinions, but a clever young man, who, from 
the elementary schools, had lately risen to the 
university, informed us, as a fact of which we were 
unaccountably ignorant, that Hamlet is the best 
of Shakespeare’s plays. After this the subject was 
closed. Every clergyman in America knows why 
Rome fell : it was owing to the corruption of morals 
depicted by Juvenal and Petronius. The fact that 
morals became exemplary about two centuries 
before the fall of the Western Empire is unknown or 
ignored. English children are taught one view of the 
French Revolution, French children are taught 
another; neither is true, but in each case it would 
be highly imprudent to disagree with the teacher, 
and few feel any inclination to do so. Teachers 
ought to encourage intelligent disagreement on the 
part of their pupils, even urging them to read books 
having opinions opposed to those of the instructor. 
But this is seldom done, with the result that much 
education consists in the instilling of unfounded 
dogmas in place of a spirit of inquiry. This results, 
not necessarily from any fault in the teacher, but 
from a curriculum which demands too much 
apparent knowledge, with a consequent need of 
haste and undue definiteness. 

The most serious aspect of over-education is its 
effect on health, especially mental health. This evil, 
as it exists in England, is a result of the hasty appli- 
cation of a Liberal watchword, “equality of oppor- 

i68 



COMPETITION IN EDUCATION 

tunity.” Until fairly recent times, education was a 
prerogative of the sons of the well-to-do, but under 
the influence of democracy it was felt, quite rightly, 
that higher education ought to be open to all who 
could profit by it, and that ability to profit by it 
depended in the main upon intellect. The solution 
was found in a vast system of scholarships depending 
upon scholastic proficiency at an early age, and to 
a very large extent upon competitive examinations. 
Belief in the sovereign virtues of competition pre- 
vented anyone from reflecting that boys and girls 
and adolescents ought not to be subjected to the 
very severe strain involved. If the strain were only 
intellectual it would be bad enough, but it is also 
emotional: the whole future of a boy or girl, not 
only economically, but socially, turns upon success 
in a brief test after long preparation. Consider the 
situation of an intelligent boy from a poor home, 
whose interests are almost wholly intellectual, but 
whose companions care nothing for books. If he 
succeeds in reaching the university, he may hope to 
make congenial friends and spend his life in con- 
genial work; if not, he is doomed not only to 
poverty but to mental solitude. With this alternative 
before him, he is almost certain to work anxiously 
but not wisely, and to destroy his mental resiliency 
before his education is finished. 

While the evil is obvious to every one who has 
experience of teaching in a university, the remedy is 
not easy to devise. It is probably undesirable, and 

169 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

certainly financially impossible, to give a university 
education to everybody ; consequently some method 
of selection is necessary, and the method must 
depend chiefly upon intellectual proficiency. It 
would be better if the strain were not so concen- 
trated as it is when it depends upon an examination, 
and if teachers could select a certain proportion of 
their pupils on the basis of their general impression. 
No doubt this would lead to a certain amount of 
toadying and favouritism, but probably these evils 
would be less grave than those of the present system. 
It would be well to select those who were to have a 
university education at the age of twelve, after 
which they should not be subjected to competition, 
but only to reasonable conditions of industry. And 
at the age of twelve they should be selected rather 
for intelligence than for actual proficiency. 

This is a merit in the intelligence tests, which are 
too little used in England, though in America they 
are relied upon to an extent for which there is, to 
my mind, no scientific justification. Their merit is 
not that they are infallible — ^no test can be that — 
but that they bring out more or less correct results 
on the whole, and that they do not demand the 
exhausting and nerve-racking preparation which 
is required for the usual type of examination. 

In urban areas, and wherever there is a sufficient 
dexisity of population, there ought to be special 
schools for very clever boys and girls, as there 
already are for the mentally deficient. A beginning 

170 



COMPETITION IN EDUCATION 

has been made in this direction in America,* but as 
yet only on a small scale. 

Some of the results are interesting. For example : 
a boy whose intelligence quotient was 190 (100 
being the average) was found in an ordinary school, 
where he had no friends and was regarded as a fool. 
He was transferred to a special class for boys with 
median intelligence quotient 164, where he was 
quickly recognized as a leader and “was elected to 
many posts of trust and honour.” A great deal of 
needless pzun and friction would be saved to clever 
children if they were not compelled to associate 
intimately with stupid contemporaries. There is an 
idea that rubbing up against all and sundry in 
youth is a good preparation for life. This appears to 
me to be rubbish. No one, in later life, associates 
with all and sundry. Bookmakers are not obliged to 
live among clergymen, nor clergymen among book- 
makers. In later life a man’s occupation and status 
give an indication of his interests and capacities. I 
have, in my day, lived in various different social 
strata— diplomatists, dons, pacifists, gaol-birds, and 
politicians — but nowhere have I found the higgledy- 
piggledy ruthlessness of a set of boys. Intellectual 
boys, for the most part, have not yet learnt to con- 
ceal their intellectuality, and are therefore exposed 
to constant persecution on account of their oddity. 
The more adaptable among them learn, in time, to 
seem ordinary and to put on a smooth and vacuous 

* Sec Gifted Children, by Hollingworth, Chapters IX and X. 

171 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

exterior, but I cannot see that this is a lesson worth 
learning. If you walk through a farmyard, you may 
observe cows and sheep and pigs and goats and 
geese and ducks and hens and pigeons, all behaving 
in their several ways: no one thinks that a duck 
should acquire social adaptability by learning to 
behave like a pig. Yet this is exactly what is thought 
so valuable for boys at school, where the pigs tend 
to be the aristocracy. 

The advantages of special schools for the cleverer 
children are very great. Not only will they avoid 
social persecution, thereby escaping much pain and 
emotional fatigue and all the lessons in cowardice 
which cause clever adults often to prostitute their 
brains in the service of powerful fools. From a 
purely intellectual point of view they can be 
taught much faster, and not have to endure the 
boredom of hearing things that they already under- 
stand being explained to the other members of the 
class; moreover, their conversation with each other 
is likely to be of a sort to fix knowledge in their 
memory, and their spzu-e-time occupations can be 
intelligent without fear of ridicule. Nothing can be 
urged against such schools except administrative 
difficulties and that form of democratic sentiment 
which has its source in envy. At present, every 
clever boy or girl feels odd ; in such an environment 
this feeling would disappear. 

One of the difficulties of every large educational 
machine is that the administrators are, as a rule, 

17a 



COMPETITION IN EDUCATION 

not teachers, and have not the experience required 
for knowing what is possible and what is impossible. 
When a man begins to teach, unless he teaches 
selected groups of specially intelligent pupils, he 
finds with surprise that young people learn much 
less and much more slowly than he had supposed. 
A subject may be well worth knowing, but never- 
theless not worth teaching, because in the time 
available most pupils will learn nothing of it. The 
tendency of those who construct a curriculum with- 
out having experience of teaching is to put too much 
into it, with the result that nothing is learnt thor- 
oughly. On the other hand, the experienced teacher 
is apt to have a different bias, which is just as 
undesirable : he tends, largely because he must place 
pupils in order of merit, to prefer those subjects in 
which there can be no doubt whether the pupil has 
given the right answer. The long vogue of Latin 
grammar has been partly attributable to this source. 
Arithmetic, for the same reason, is overvalued; in 
British elementary schools it takes up far more of 
the time than it should. The average man should be 
able to do accounts, but beyond that he will seldom 
have occasion for sums. What he may have learnt of 
complicated arithmetic will be of no more practical 
use to him in later life than would the amount 
of Latin he could have learnt in the same time, 
and of far less use than what he could have 
learnt of anatomy and physiology and elementary 
hygiene. 


173 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

The problem of over-education is both important 
and difficult. It is important because a clever person 
who has been over-educated loses spontaneity, self- 
confidence, and health, and thereby becomes a far 
less useful member of the community than he might 
have been. It is difficult because, as the existing 
mass of knowledge grows greater, it becomes in- 
creasingly laborious to know all that is relevant, 
both in the more complicated practical questions 
and in scientific discovery. We cannot therefore 
avoid the evils of over-education by merely saying ; 
“Let boys and girls run wild and not be bothered 
with too much learning.” Our social structure 
increasingly depends upon trained and well-informed 
intelligence. The present world-wide depression is 
largely due to lack of education on the part of 
practical men ; if bankers and politicians understood 
currency and credit, we should all, from the highest 
to the lowest, be much richer than we are. The 
advancement of science — to take another illustration 
— cannot continue at anything like its present rate 
unless a man can reach the frontiers of existing 
knowledge by the time he is twenty-five, since few 
men are capable of profound originality after the 
age of thirty. And the average citizen cannot play 
his part in a complicated world unless he is more 
accustomed than at present to view practical issues 
as matters to be decided by the application of 
trained intelligence to masses of fact, rather than by 
prejudice, emotion, and clap-trap. For all these 

174 



COMPEXmON IN EDUCATION 

reasons, intellectual education is a vital necessity in 
the modem social order. 

There must be sufficient instruction, and there 
must not be the evils of over-education. This de- 
mands three things. First and foremost, there must 
be as little emotional strain as possible in connection 
with the acquisition of knowledge; this requires 
great changes in the system of examinations and 
scholarships, and the segregation, wherever possible, 
of the cleverer pupils. Emotional strain is the chief 
cause of harmful fatigue ; purely intellectual fatigue, 
like muscular fatigue, is repaired each night during 
sleep, but emotional fatigue prevents sufficient sleep 
or makes it unrestful through bad dreams. During 
education, therefore, young people should, as far as 
is at all possible, have a care-free existence. 

The second thing required is a drastic elimination 
of instmction that serves no useful purpose. 1 do not 
mean that children and young people should only 
acquire what is termed “useful” knowledge, but 
that they should not learn things merely because 
they always have been learnt. I have frequently 
questioned young people lately finished with school 
as to what they had learnt of history. I have generally 
foimd that they had done English history from 
Hengest and Horsa to the Norman Conquest, over 
and over again, in each new claiss, and that beyond 
that they knew nothing. I may be exceptional, but 
I have never yet found myself in a situation where 
it was really profitable to know about (say) the 

*75 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

relations of the kingdoms of Mercia and Wessex in 
the eighth century. There is much in history that is 
abundantly worth knowing, but this is hardly ever 
taught in schools. 

The third thing required is that all higher instruc- 
tion should be given with a view to teaching the 
spirit and technique of inquiry rather than from the 
standpoint of imparting the right answers to ques- 
tions. Here, again, examinations are to blame. The 
young person who has to pass (say) an elementary 
examination in English literature will probably be 
well advised to read no single word of any of the 
great writers, but to learn by heart some manual 
giving all the information except what is worth 
having. For the sake of examinations, young people 
have to learn by heart all kinds of things, such as 
dates, which it is far more sensible to look up in 
books of reference. The proper sort of instruction 
teaches the use of books, not useless feats of memory 
designed to make books unnecessary. This is already 
recognized as regards post-graduate work, but it 
ought to be recognized at a much earlier stage of 
education. And the pupil’s research should not be 
judged by the orthodoxy or otherwise of the con- 
clusion arrived at, but by the extent of knowledge 
and the reasonableness of the argument. This 
method will not only teach the power of forming 
sound judgements and keep alive the learner’s 
initiative, but will make the acquisition of know- 
ledge interesting, thereby diminishing very greatly 

176 



COMPETITION IN EDUCATION 

the amount of fatigue involved in the process. The 
fatigue of intellectual work is largely due to the 
effort of forcing oneself to give attention to what is 
boring, and therefore any method that removes the 
boredom also removes most of the fatigue. 

By these methods it is possible to become highly 
educated without endangering health and spon- 
taneity. But this is not possible while the tyranny of 
examinations and competition persists. Competition 
is not only bad as an educational fact, but also as 
an ideal to be held before the young. What the 
world now needs is not competition but organiza- 
tion and co-operation; all belief in the utility of 
competition has become an anachronism. And even 
if competition were useful, it is not in itself admir- 
able, since the emotions with which it is connected 
are the emotions of hostility and ruthlessness. The 
conception of society as an organic whole is very 
difficult for those whose minds have been steeped in 
competitive ideas. Ethically, therefore, no less than 
economically, it is undesirable to teach the young to 
be competitive. 


M 


177 



CHAPTER XIII 


EDUCATION UNDER COMMUNISM 

In previous chapters we have seen the evils pro- 
duced in education by the institution of private 
property and its connection with the patriarchal 
family. We have now to consider whether, under 
communism, other equally grave evils are to be 
expected, or whether, on the contrary, public 
education could be better under communism than 
it can ever be imder capitalism. 

The present state of education in the U.S.S.R., 
while it must be considered in this connection, is of 
course by no means decisive, since Russia is still 
engaged in construction, and is still far from the 
ultimate goal. It is more instructive, for our purpose, 
to consider what the Soviet Government hopes and 
intends than what it has already achieved. What has 
been done hitherto is necessarily in the nature of a 
compromise. At the outbreak of the Revolution a 
majority of Russians were illiterate, and the peasants, 
who formed 8o per cent, of the population, were 
highly conservative in their mentality. Lack of 
funds, lack of school buildings, lack of teachers, 
have all been grave obstacles. In spite of all these 
difiiculties, enough has been done to make it 
fairly clear what the educational system will be 
when it is completed. We will therefore consider 

178 



EDUCATION UNDER COMMUNISM 

first what is now being done in education and 
then attempt to appraise the intended educational 
future. 

A more or less official account is given by Albert 
P. Pinkevitch, President of the Second State Uni- 
versity of Moscow, in his book on The New Education 
in the Soviet Republic, published in London by Williams 
& Norgate, Ltd. This book may be accepted as 
authoritative on all questions as to the scholastic 
organization and its present purposes. Many readers 
may be surprised to find how much there is that 
is similar to what exists in Western countries. To 
teach children to read and write and do sums is a 
piece of technical work which is not very much 
affected by the economic system. Questions of 
health, also, are uncontroversial. But in addition to 
such matters it will be found that there are systems 
of boy scouts, of teaching school morale, of incul- 
cating loyalty to the State, and so on, which are 
closely similar to those in use in England and 
America. And something of the familiar outlook of 
the University President, as known in the United 
States, pierces through the unfamiliar communist 
phraseology. In spite of these echoes of older sys- 
tems, however, there is much that is new, and what 
is new is of great importance. 

The intimate connection of education with the 
social system, which has been emphasized in the 
foregoing pages, is, of course, asserted almost too 
definitely by all communists. Pinkevitch quotes from 

179 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 


Lenin a passage on the schools of Western capitalist 
countries : 

The more cultured was a bourgeois State, the more subtly 
it deceived, asserting that the school can remain outside of 
politics and thus serve society as a whole. In reality the school 
was wholly an instrument of class domination in the hands 
of the bourgeoisie; it was throughout permeated with the 
spirit of caste ; and its aim was to give to the capitalists obliging 
serfs and competent workers. 

In the communist State, the school is to be, quite 
frankly, an instrument of class domination in the 
hands of the proletariat, and there is to be no moral 
teaching other than what is useful to the workers in 
the class struggle. Lenin is quoted again as saying : 

We deny any kind of morality which is taken from the non- 
human and non-class conception ; and we regard such morality 
as a fraud and a deception which blocks the minds of workers 
and peasants in the interests of landowners and capitalists. 
We say that our morality is entirely subservient to the interests 
of the class struggle of the proletariat. 

It would seem to follow that when the proletariat 
has achieved definitive victory, so that there is no 
longer any class struggle, there will be no such 
thing as morality. Pinkevitch, however, allows a 
somewhat more positive ethic to appear when he 
says : 

The aim of nurture and general instruction in Soviet Russia 
is to aid in the all-round development of a healthy, strong, 
actively brave, independently thinking and acting man, 
acquainted with the many sides of contemporary culture, 
a creator and a warrior in the interests of the proletariat 
and consequently in the final analysis in the interests of the 
whole of humanity, 

180 



EDUCATION UNDER COMMUNISM 


By merely omitting the incidental reference to the 
proletariat in this passage we obtain a very definite 
ethic involving nothing distinctively communistic. 
But in the period of transition propaganda must 
play a large part; during this period “the aim is, 
so to speak, the indoctrination of the youth in the 
proletarian philosophy.” 

Pinkevitch recognizes that “from the point of 
view of character formation infancy and childhood 
are indisputably the most important periods of 
life.” He holds that it would be desirable if infants 
could be cared for in institutions, not only for their 
own sakes, but also in order “to realize completely 
the socialistic State in which woman, liberated from 
petty, dulling, and unproductive toil, takes her place 
side by side with man.” Both in infancy and in 
childhood he thinks the school a better influence 
than the family. 


Our chief criticism of the contemporary school is that it deals 
with children who spend three-fourths of their time outside 
and away from the influence of the school, with children who 
come to school with certain information, certain habits, and 
at least a disposition towards a certain outlook upon the 
world. Without the slightest doubt the children’s home, which 
boys and girls enter in infancy or early childhood and where 
they remain until the approach of manhood and womanhood, 
provides a more perfect form of education. ... In the chil- 
dren’s home we can create without hampering circumstance 
the kind of educative environment to which we teachers of 
to-day aspire. But in ordinary day-schools, because of the 
superior strength of the home and other outside influences, 
we often find ourselves powerless. 

i8i 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

The aspirations of the Soviet Government are made 
clear by these passages, but for the present they 
are no more than aspirations, and only 4 or 5 per 
cent, of children of pre-school age attend any kind 
of institution. Universal compulsory education, at 
present, is confined to the four years from eight to 
twelve, which are spent in the primary school. 

Throughout the period of education, whether long 
or short, the Russian school differs from that of 
other countries in being much less academic, much 
less narrowly concentrated on the imparting of 
knowledge. “Knowledge must not be the aim; it 
must rather be the natural and incidental product 
of a definite organization of the life of the children 
in the school. In truth we must make our school a 
‘school of life.’ ” “In its work the school must be 
connected most intimately with reality ; a prominent 
place must be given to productive labour ; the entire 
structure of the school must promote the develop- 
ment of the social instincts and provide a socialistic 
training of the revolutionary communists of the 
future.” Children in school do not only lessons, but 
useful manual work, so far as their strength and 
skill permit; and they do this not as education but 
as part of the duty of a citizen. Pinkevitch speaks of 
“the tremendous social and political role of labour 
in the school. ... As long as labour is looked upon 
as something utilitarian or valuable from the point 
of view of motor training we shall not have a school 
which merits the name of socialistic or communistic. 

i8a 



EDUCATION UNDER COMMUNISM 

Our pupil must feel himself a member of and a 
worker in a labouring society.” This is one of the 
most important features in Russian education. 

Pinkevitch does not tell, in as much detail as 
could be wished, exactly what labour children per- 
form, and how many hours of the curriculum are 
occupied by it. “Regular occupations in actual pro- 
duction in factory or mill,” he says, “are a part of 
the manual work of the school in the sense that they 
are closely articulated with the teaching program.” 
In rural districts work on farms takes the place of 
work in factories. As to this, Julian Huxley says 
truly 

This association of rural schools with farms has much more 
to be said for it than that of urban schools with factories. 
For agriculture is a broad subject, while each factory deals 
only with one specialized branch of industry; agriculture is 
more nearly coterminous with country life than industry with 
life in the city. And the dovetailing of the school with the 
farm as an integral part of a single institution is good from 
the educational point of view. 

This point of view, however, is radically different 
from that of Soviet educators, who conceive the 
labour of school children rather in the light of a 
moral discipline. “While studying is necessary,” says 
Pinkevitch, “the teaching of practical life activities 
is no less essential. In a socialistic labour school these 
activities must be social, and therefore useful. . . . 
Are we to regard socially useful work as work of a 
social character which is useful to the school and its 
• A Scientist Among the Soviets, p. 102. 

183 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

pupils, or as work of the school which is useful to 
the surrounding community? To our way of think- 
ing the entire meaning of the problem depends on 
the acceptance of the second interpretation.” That 
is to say, the labour of the children is to be ordinary 
necessary work, not special work selected on account 
of its educational value. 

Socially useful work in the school is divided into 
two main departments, the first consisting of agita- 
tion and propaganda, the second of practical work. 
Under the former heading children are to agitate 
on a great variety of topics, e.g. for rotation of 
crops, for the “most worthy” candidates in elections, 
against religion, malaria, bed bugs, smoking and 
drunkenness. Practical work shows a similar diver- 
sity. Children are to engage in disinfecting grain 
with formaline, in combating ravines by tree- 
planting, in putting electric light into the homes 
of peasants, in distributing election literature, in 
reading newspapers to illiterates, in exterminating 
parasites, and in aiding needy widows. 

The Soviet school aims not only at understanding 
the world but at transforming it; its purpose, as 
Pinkevitch states, is “the reconstruction of the world 
in accordance with the theory of Marx.” The whole 
conception of passive cognition is foreign to the 
system ; this must be remembered if the system is to 
be fairly judged. 

I think it was as Russians rather than as Marxists 
that the Thirty-Fifth All Russian Conference on 

184 



EDUCATION UNDER COMMUNISM 

Pre-School Education adopted the following resolu- 
tion; “Music should penetrate completely the life 
of the child. There should be music during work, 
music during play, and music during holidays. The 
teacher should take into consideration the personal 
creativeness of the child and by organizing an 
orchestra and collective singing should provide him 
with the necessary musical experiences.” This is 
admirable, but I cannot believe that a communist 
revolution would make the English equally musical. 

The war mentality, which is necessary in Russia 
owing to the hostility of other countries to com- 
munism, has introduced into education a number 
of features which are closely similar to those which 
patriotism has produced elsewhere. The “Young 
Pioneers” are a copy of the Boy Scouts, and have 
closely similar laws and vows. Their laws are : 

(1) The Pioneer is true to the cause of the working class and 

to the covenants of Lenin. 

(2) The Pioneer is the younger brother and helper of the 

Komsomol and Communist. 

(3) The Pioneer is a comrade to Pioneers and to the workers’ 

and peasants’ children of the world. 

(4) The Pioneer organizes the surrounding children and par- 

ticipates with them in the environing life: the Pioneer 
is an example to all children. 

(5) The Pioneer strives for knowledge. Knowledge and skill 

are power in the struggle for the workers’ cause. 

The Pioneers also take a solemn oath : 

“I, a Young Pioneer of the Soviet Union, in the 
presence of my comrades solemnly promise that: 

185 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

(i) I will firmly defend the cause of the working 
class in the struggle for the liberation of the workers 
and peasants of the world; (2) I will honourably 
and unfalteringly carry out the covenants of Lenin 
and the laws and customs of the Young Pioneers.” 

Although we are explicitly told that the Soviet 
Government does not believe in “moral” education, 
there is a distinct flavour of morality, one might say 
of priggery, about these laws and vows. The picture 
of the Young Pioneer striving for knowledge and 
being an example to all children recalls the pious 
children’s books of my youth. 

To those who have listened to reactionary propa- 
ganda it will come as a surprise to find that the 
Soviet attitude on sex education is far from radical. 
“The role of the teacher and parent,” says Pinke- 
vitch, “is to safeguard the child against undue 
stimulation of the sex interest.” The energy of the 
young “should be directed towards physical culture, 
athletic sports, manual labour, intellectual activity, 
the Pioneer movement, and all forms of social work 
which require a considerable amount of physical 
power. If the strength of the child is expended 
normally in these directions, no strength for the 
hypertrophic development of the sex impulses will 
remain.” Co-education is approved of as diminish- 
ing the sex attraction between boys and girls. 
Information on sexual subjects should not be ex- 
cessive, since, if it is, “the result can only be the 
stimulation of an unhealthy and, one can suppose, 
186 



EDUCATION UNDER COMMUNISM 

an insufficiently chaste attitude towards the sex 
relationship.” He repudiates with horror a sugges- 
tion that children should observe coitus in dogs, 
chickens, cattle, and horses, and says : “If questions 
of sex are not singled out for separate and special 
emphasis, the attention of children and adolescents 
will not be fixed upon them.” He holds that sex 
questions should be subordinated to “other more 
interesting and important problems.” All this may 
be sound or unsound, but it shows nothing attri- 
butable to the Revolution. Except for the advocacy 
of co-education, which can hardly be called sub- 
versive, the views expressed are in substantial 
agreement with those of English Headmasters. 

To estimate the prospects of education under 
communism from the present practice in Russia is 
not easy. Not only are there important respects in 
which the intentions of the Government have not 
yet been carried out, but, what is more important, 
the war mentality produced by the world-wide 
struggle between capitalism and communism so 
dominates the schools that it is difficult to foresee 
how they would develop if communism were every- 
where victorious. I have not myself been in Russia 
since 1920, when little had been done. At that time 
I saw nursery schools where the children were happy 
and the physical care was excellent, but where they 
were exposed to intensive propaganda as soon as 
they could speak. I saw schools for older boys, 
which were doing their best in spite of an appalling 

187 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

lack of equipment. I spoke with university pro- 
fessors, whose position was far from agreeable. But 
this experience is of little use in view of subsequent 
developments, as to which, however, I have had the 
advantage of first-hand reports. 

In regard to religion and sex there seems to be, 
at present, little difference between Russian and 
Western schools. The religion taught is not the 
same, but it is taught with equal dogmatism. In 
Russia, as in the West, there are propositions which 
must be believed blindly, not subjected to critical 
scrutiny. It is true that the Russian religion, unlike 
that of Christian countries, is one which most 
young people who are exposed to it accept enthu- 
siastically and make the basis of their lives. It is 
true that intelligent people can regard the Russian 
religion as a means towards the creation of a better 
world, and can accept its dogmas, at least pragma- 
tically, without intellectual abdication. In these 
respects, Marxism has now the advantage which 
Christianity had when it was young, but would it 
retain these advantages if it were established and 
victorious? It is associated, for the moment, with 
the hopefulness and the fruitful activity due to the 
existence of a vast half-empty country ripe for eco- 
nomic development. America was at one time in 
that condition, and was then the protagonist of 
democracy. All progressive Europeans felt at that 
time an enthusiasm for America and for democracy, 
to which they attributed virtues which we can now 
1 88 



EDUCATION UNDER COMMUNISM 

see to have been connected with the existence of a 
continent awaiting exploitation. A similar geo- 
graphical accident now operates in favour of com- 
munism, and we must discoimt its effect before we 
can estimate the results which communism would 
be likely to have in economically developed coun- 
tries, where it could hardly give rise to the prolonged 
optimism which has characterized Russia in recent 
years. 

If the Marxism dogma remains as virulent as it is 
at present, it must, in time, become a great obstacle 
to intellectual progress. Already there are aspects of 
modern science which communists find it difficult to 
reconcile with their theology, for example, the views 
as to the atom to which quantum theory has led. 
The opinion that everything in human character 
has economic causes may, at any moment, come into 
violent conflict with science. For example: hook- 
worm greatly diminishes energy in warm countries, 
and in this matter climate, not economics, is the 
decisive factor. Moreover, the whole Marxian philo- 
sophy is so much concerned with the class struggle 
that it becomes vague and indefinite when it con- 
templates the class-less world that it aims at creating. 
If a conquering dogmatic Marxism were to replace 
Christianity, it might be as great an obstacle to 
scientific progress as Christianity has been. 

It seems improbable, however, that the philosophy 
at present associated with communism would retain 
its force if communism were victorious. Com- 

189 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

munism is, in itself, merely an economic system, 
which is to be judged on economic and political 
grounds. The doctrine of dialectical materialism 
and the economic interpretation of history are not 
logically necessary parts of communist theory. If 
communism as an economic system were no longer 
challenged, there would not be the same necessity 
for the suppression of heresy : Marx and Lenin, no 
doubt, would still be venerated, but it would be 
discovered that they had not meant what they said. 
Present-day dogmatism is an incident in the struggle, 
and we may hope that it would gradually fade away 
if the struggle were brought to a successful issue. 

Similar considerations apply as regards the con- 
flict of classes. The education in capitalist countries 
suffers, as we saw, from the domination of the rich, 
and the education in Russia suffers, conversely, 
from the domination of the proletariat. Children of 
proletarians are taught to despise children of “bour- 
geois,” and young people of “bourgeois” origin have 
more difficulty than others in obtaining higher 
education. But within a generation this trouble will 
have disappeared, since there will no longer be any 
but proletarian children. 

A more serious question, as regards the future, is 
the virtual abolition of the family. It is to be ex- 
pected that, when funds permit, the Soviet Govern- 
ment will gradually cause more and more children 
to be educated wholly in institutions, and to have 
little or no contact with their parents. The advan- 

190 



EDUCATION UNDER COMMUNISM 

tages and disadvantages of this system have been 
considered in an earlier chapter, and I shall not 
repeat them, but for good or evil this is probably 
the most important feature in fully developed 
commmiist education. 

There are several features in which education 
under communism is already preferable to any that 
is possible in capitalist countries. One of these is the 
mitigation of competition and the substitution of 
group activities for individual work. It is true that 
isolated progressive schools can attempt this in such 
countries as England and America, but they are 
handicapped by the necessity of preparing children 
for examinations and for the competitive struggles of 
adult life. Moreover, the children educated in excep- 
tional schools are liable to have some difficulty in 
adapting themselves to the environment — a diffi- 
culty which may be worth enduring, but from which 
the Russian child is exempt. A school which aims at 
creating a peculiar environment must be more or 
less isolated from the ordinary world, which is 
regrettable even when it is necessary. In Russia 
competition is eliminated not only from the school 
but from daily life, which makes possible the 
creation of a co-operative spirit unknown in the 
West. 

The participation of the school in the ordinary 
work of the world, though it has its dangers, has 
advantages which, to my mind, outweigh all 
p>ossible drawbacks. At present, there is too much 

191 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

propaganda in the work that children are expected 
to do: they are made, at an early age, into mis- 
sionaries of the communist faith, which cannot fail 
to induce a certain smugness and undesirable self- 
assurance. But it is good for young people to feel 
themselves part of the community, and to have the 
sense that they ought to be useful so far as their 
capacities permit. Progressive educators in the West 
have, I think, been inclined to generate self- 
importance in the child, and to let him feel himself 
a little aristocrat whom adults must serve. This 
leads him to grow up an anarchist, impatient of the 
restraints of social life. From this defect, Russian 
education is free : the child is made to feel, from the 
first, that he is a unit in society and has a duty to 
the community. And he is made to feel this, not so 
much by precept, but rather by the ordering of his 
activities. This behaviouristic part of moral educa- 
tion in Russia is admirable, and has, if testimony is 
to be believed, the consequence that even the ablest 
of young men feel themselves part and parcel of 
the community, not, as they too often do in the 
West, isolated units who become frivolous through 
despair or predatory from cynicism. Communism 
has discovered a moral discipline which modern 
youth can accept, and a way of life in which modern 
youth can be happy. Capitalist countries are finding 
this problem insoluble, because their institutions 
cannot be preserved without humbug. 

To the intellectual educated in the rich and 


193 



EDUCATION UNDER COMMUNISM 

complex culture of an old civilization, there is, it 
must be confessed, something thin and almost 
intolerably monotonous in the communist outlook. 
The practice of referring all questions, how^ever 
remote, to the class war vulgarizes everything, and 
destroys the pleasure in mental skill. Any illustra- 
tion from pure science will serve to show what I 
mean ; take, for example, the methods by which the 
distances of remote stars and nebulae are estimated. 
These methods are a masterpiece of ingenuity, and 
of careful reasoning combined with accurate obser- 
vation. So far as I know, it makes little difference to 
the issue of the claiss struggle whether the distance of 
a given star is a hundred or a thousand light-years, 
but it increases our respect for the human race that 
men should be able to decide which of these is 
nearer to the truth. I am not suggesting that com- 
munism would put a veto on astronomical research, 
but I am suggesting that its philosophy, if genuinely 
believed, would atrophy the impulse of scientific 
curiosity which leads men to such investigations. 
The Marxian outlook leads to a wrong emphasis. 
The work of Newton, for example, may have had 
all sorts of economic causes, but the work itself is far 
more interesting and important than its causes. 
Economics, after all, has to do with the problem of 
keeping alive; if this problem were satisfactorily 
solved, as it could be through communism, we 
should need something else to think about, and 
some new principle upon which to interpret future 

193 


N 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

history. Simplicity is a merit in a slogan, but not in 
a philosophy. 

Everything deliberately planned is likely to suffer 
from undue simplicity, leading to monotony, and 
even to a kind of insanity from perpetually hearing 
the same note struck. It may be that life itself will 
avoid this danger; at any rate, in Russia, there is 
still so much surviving from before the Revolution 
that communist planning cannot introduce undue 
simplicity for a long time to come. But in education, 
if there were not such obvious and interesting prac- 
tical tasks to be accomplished, the danger of over- 
simplification would be very real. The world is more 
rich and varied than the Marxian formula. A 
generation confined within the philosophy of Das 
Kapital may be useful, happy, and formidable, but 
cannot be wise, and cannot know that it is not; 
intellectually, it will be cocksure and shallow. But 
in saying this I am speaking from the standpoint of 
philosophy, not of politics. 

From the standpoint of politics (in the widest 
sense) I think our verdict must be different. Com- 
munism offers a solution of the difficult problem of 
the family and sex-equality — a solution which we 
may dislike, but which does, at any rate, provide a 
possible issue. It gives children an education from 
which the anti-social idea of competition has been 
almost entirely eliminated. It creates an economic 
system which appears to be the only practicable 
alternative to one of masters and slaves. It destroys 

*94 



EDUCATION UNDER COMMUNISM 

that separation of the school from life which the 
school owes to its monkish origin, and owing to 
which the intellectual, in the West, is becoming an 
increasingly useless member of society. It offers to 
young men and women a hope which is not chimeri- 
cal and an activity in the usefulness of which they 
feel no doubt. And if it conquers the world, as it 
may do, it will solve most of the major evils of our 
time. On these grounds, in spite of reservations, it 
deserves support. 


»95 



CHAPTER XIV 


EDUCATION AND ECONOMICS 

In public education as it exists at the present day 
in Western countries we have found, in previous 
chapters, various features which called for criticism. 
There are those who hold that whatever is amiss 
in education, or, for that matter, in anything else, 
has its source in a bad economic system. I do not 
myself believe this ; I incline to the view that under 
any economic system there will be a certain amount 
of stupidity and a certain amount of love of power, 
each of which will stand in the way of the creation 
of a perfect educational system. Nevertheless, the 
influence of economic factors on education is un- 
doubtedly profound, and not always superficially 
obvious. I shall endeavour, in this chapter, to 
isolate the economic factor in education at various 
times and in various countries. 

European education, when it first revived after 
the Dark Ages, was the prerogative of the priest- 
hood, and to this day it has characteristics which 
it owes to its ecclesiastical origin. Before the Renais- 
sance, the lay aristocracy had, in general, little 
knowledge, but the clergy, and especially the regu- 
lar clergy, not infrequently possessed considerable 
erudition. A certain slight knowledge of Latin was 
a professional necessity, but this bare minimum 

196 



EDUCATION AND ECONOMICS 

would not have amounted to much. It was mainly 
contact with the Moors, especially in Sicily and 
Spain, that caused the revival of learning in the 
eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth centuries. And 
while this contact had, of course, causes which were 
largely economic, its effect upon learning must be 
attributed in the main to disinterested intellectual 
curiosity on the part of a rather small number of 
individuals.' Scholastic philosophy, and mediaeval 
learning generally, were due to the enthusiasm of 
a minority of ecclesiastics, most of whom derived 
little pecuniary advantage from their labours, while 
not a few incurred discredit by the boldness of their 
speculations. The existence of monks and friars was 
necessary for the movement, but its primary cause 
was the mere thirst for knowledge. 

On the education of aristocratic laymen, which 
began somewhat later, the same may be said. The 
Emperor Frederick II, with whom secular culture 
may be taken to begin, had been in contact with 
the Mahometans from his earliest youth, and was 
devoured by an insatiable curiosity concerning 
everything ascertainable. The revival of Greek in 
Italy in the fifteenth century, and the courtly cul- 
ture which spread thence to the northern nations, 
is to be attributed, in its inception, to love of learn- 
ing for its own sake. It is true that this motive was 
soon submerged: knowledge of Latin and some 

* See The Legacy of Israel (Oxford University Press), by various 
authors, pp. 204 ff. 


197 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

knowledge of Greek became the mark of a gentle- 
man, and was forced upon boys, with the result 
that men lost the taste for it. Even then, however, 
the motive for acquiring classical learning was snob- 
bish rather than economic: no landowner ceased 
to receive his rents if he failed to acquire culture. 
The aristocrat, like the monk, was a man of leisure, 
and could, if he chose, learn for pleasure, without 
any utilitarian purpose. 

Although the conception of knowledge as a thing 
desirable on its own account still lingers in univer- 
sities, and among a few belated philosophers (of 
whom I am one), various things have happened 
which have completely changed the current view 
as to the function of education. The most important 
of these is the establishment of universal compul- 
sory instruction. It was found that boys and girls 
could be turned into better citizens and more effi- 
cient workers if they knew how to read and write 
than if they did not. It is true that, in pursuing 
this aim, statesmen were hampered by the scholastic 
tradition: the education in elementary schools is 
almost purely bookish, although it might be argued 
that a semi-practical training would have best 
served the statesmen’s purpose. In this respect, 
Russian education is better adapted to the age. 
Nevertheless, the elementary schools have, on the 
whole, done what was wanted of them, and are 
now, in every civilized country, one of the essential 
instruments of government. 

198 



EDUCATION AND ECONOMICS 

Another factor tending to a utilitarian view of 
education has been the growth of science and 
industry. Technical processes nowadays demand 
scientific knowledge, and new inventions are a source 
both of wealth and of national greatness. In this 
respect also, the traditions of an earlier age have 
prevented complete adaptation to present need 
except in Russia. If education were governed wholly 
by utilitarian considerations, the place of science 
and industrial technique would be much larger 
than it is, and the place of literary culture would 
be much smaller. But although this has not yet 
happened completely, it is happening by degrees, 
and will have happened completely before very 
long. 

The influence of economic causes upon education 
may be dealt with under five heads, which we will 
consider successively. 

First: According to the economic circumstances 
of a State, the amount of money which it can afford 
to spend on education will vary. But for the en- 
richment of the Western nations through the Indus- 
trial Revolution, universal compulsory education 
would have been impossible. No country has ever 
had a greater respect for learning than existed in 
China before the Chinese had adopted Western 
standards, but China was not rich enough to teach 
reading and writing to more than 5 per cent, of 
the population. In the England of 1780, or even 
of 1830, it would have been very difficult to impose 

199 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

new taxation sufficient to provide schooling for 
everybody. At present, it is still considered impossible 
to provide nursery schools except in a few rare 
instances. The raising of the school-leaving age, on 
the other hand, is not thought to raise economic 
difficulties. Owing to unemployment and protec- 
tionism, practical men are agreed that everybody’s 
work makes everybody else poorer, so that it is a 
benefit to the community to keep any section of it 
away from productive employment. On this ground 
it is thought that we should all be richer if children 
were kept longer at school. In England, the obstacle 
to raising the school age is not economic, but theo- 
logical: the sects cannot agree as to the brand of 
superstition with which boys and girls shall be sent 
out into the world. 

Second: One of the purposes of education is to 
increase total production. This was probably the 
principal motive in the minds of those who first in- 
troduced universal education, and it is undoubtedly 
a sound motive. A population that can read and 
write is more efficient than one that cannot. But 
the motive of maximizing production operates even 
more directly in promoting technical education, 
scientific instruction, and research. The British 
Government spends very much less money on re- 
search than it would spend if it were actuated by 
sound financial calculation, the reason being that 
most civil servants have had a classical education 
and are ignorant of everything that a modem man 


200 



EDUCATION AND ECONOMICS 

should know. Consider, for example, medical re- 
search. The average citizen is an expense to the 
community at the beginning and end of his life, 
but profitable during his working years. Children 
who die have been a sheer economic loss, and a 
diminution of mortality during the early years is 
therefore a gain to the State. Or, again, consider 
such a matter as economic entomology, which is 
of decisive importance in many branches of agri- 
culture: the minuteness of our public expenditure 
on this subject must be regarded as wilful extrava- 
gance. I am saying nothing of the more obvious 
and well-advertised branches of industrial research, 
such as synthetic dyes, high explosives, poison gases, 
etc., some useful, some quite the reverse. The use- 
fulness of scientific knowledge is, as yet, not realized 
even by most of the people who are considered 
educated; when it is, we may expect greatly in- 
creased scientific endowments and a much larger 
place for science in the curriculum of secondary 
schools. 

Third : The system of distribution has a profound 
effect upon education, much greater than that of 
the two factors we have hitherto considered. The 
system of distribution determines the division of 
the community into classes, and wherever there are 
classes, different classes will receive different kinds 
of education. In a capitalist society, wage-eam«rs 
get least education, and those who aim at entering 
a learned profession get most, while an intermediate 


201 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

amount is considered suitable for those who are 
going to be “gentlemen” or business men. As a 
general rule, a boy or girl belongs to the same 
social class as his or her parents. But those who win 
scholarships by exceptional abihty can rise from 
the wage-earning class into the professional class. 
By this means, in England, the best brains bom 
into the wage-earning class are poUtically sterilized, 
and cease, as a rule, to be on the side to which 
their birth would have assigned them. In this fluidity 
of classes a plutocratic society differs from an aristo- 
cratic one ; that is one reason why revolutions are 
less apt to occur under plutocracies than under 
aristocracies. 

The economic system which its opponents call 
“capitalism” is a complex one, and for our purposes 
it is important to subject it to some degree of 
analysis. There are, I should say, three chief sources 
of wealth in the modern world outside the U.S.S.R. 
First, the ownership of land and natural monopolies ; 
second, inheritance in the patriarchal family ; third, 
business enterprise. These three are not inseparably 
connected; Henry George wished to abolish the 
first, while leaving the second and third untouched ; 
in the CathoUc secular priesthood, the first exists 
and the third might exist, but the second is elimi- 
nated ; certain anti-Semites, if one may judge by 
their diatribes, would preserve the first and second, 
while destroying the third. I think land-owning and 
inheritance, both of which are survivals of the aristo- 


302 



EDUCATION AND ECONOMICS 

cratic regime, are much more open to socialist 
criticism than business enterprise; where this last 
is the sole source of success, as, for example, in the 
case of Henry Ford, it is questionable whether it 
does as much harm as good to the community as 
a whole. And certainly the conception of class, 
as generally understood, is impossible apart from 
inheritance. In education, more especially, the 
important thing is that the children of the well- 
to-do have an education which is different from 
that given to the children of wage-earners. In 
America, where plutocracy is less affected than in 
Europe by the lingering remnants of aristocracy, 
business enterprise is commonly represented as the 
main source of wealth. This has an effect upon the 
mentality of the young which is quite different 
from that which occurs in a society when land- 
owning and inheritance are the socially prominent 
sources of wealth. It emphasizes individual effort, 
and is to that extent good ; but it emphasizes effort 
in the form of competition, and is in this respect 
anti-social. Under a more just economic system 
there would not be competition of the present sort, 
nor would there be classes such as are familiar to 
us. It is true that there might still be competition 
of a kind, and there might still be different classes 
in a sense. But the kind and the sense would be 
very different from those to which we are accus- 
tomed. In a communist society there would be 
positions of power, and there would be positions 

203 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

in which the work was unusually pleasant. The 
men occupying these positions would in some sense 
form a higher class than those occupying positions 
involving little power and unpleasant work. And 
there would presumably be competition to obtain 
the posts involving more power and more pleasant 
work. But in a world without inheritance and pater- 
nal power, each individual would compete entirely 
on his own merits, and not with the unfair advantage 
of better educational opportunities. If he obtained 
a better education than his neighbour, that would 
be because he had shown himself better qualified 
to receive it, not because his father happened to 
be rich. Whatever justification of classes might exist 
in such a society would therefore be founded in 
each individual case upon intrinsic merit, A great 
violinist, for example, will always be superior to 
one who is mediocre, and will be more honoured 
even if he is not more highly paid. This degree of 
inequality and competition is unavoidable. The 
inequality is rooted in the nature of things, and 
the competition is necessary in order that difficult 
work may be performed by the most competent 
men. That is why the problem of over-education, 
which we considered in an earher chapter, is a 
difficult one. Educational competition will, how- 
ever, be much less poignant than it is at present 
when all have economic equality, and all have 
economic security, not only for themselves but for 
their children. It is inequality and insecurity that 
204 



EDUCATION AND ECONOMICS 

make competition so bitter at the present time, and 
when these elements are removed, the sting will be 
taken out of it. 

With regard to patriotism, though other motives 
enter in, there is a connection with private property, 
though this is not immediately obvious, and does 
not exist in the consciousness of most individuals. 
It is a round-about connection, caused by the more 
predatory forms of capitalism. Undeveloped coun- 
tries have two uses from the standpoint of the 
investor: as markets, and as sources of raw mate- 
rials. In both respects they are more profitable 
when they are under the control of the State to 
which the investor belongs. French capital finds 
a profitable field of investment in North Africa; 
British capital in India; and American capital in 
Central America. In this way the investor who 
thinks of investing his money outside his own 
country becomes interested in imperiaUsm, eco- 
nomically if not territorially, and finds that by suit- 
able patriotic propaganda a considerable part of 
the expense of his enterprise can be shifted on to 
the shoulders of the tax-payer. This is the source 
of most of the patriotism of powerful nations, al- 
though the citizens who shout for the flag are, in 
general, unaware of the sinister forces that have 
led them to do so. The nationalism of the weaker 
nations is a defence against that of the predatory 
nations. In so far as they are resisting exploitation 
instead of practising it, they are momentarily in 

205 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

a better moral position than that of the stronger 
nations. But the sentiments generated in a weak 
nation which is fighting for independence are such 
that, as soon as it succeeds, it acquires all the vices 
which it had previously decried in its oppressors. 
Poland, after nearly two hundred years of sub- 
jection, acquired freedom, but saw no reason for 
not passing on to the Ukrainians the burdens which 
had previously been endured by Poles. Nationalism 
is vicious as a principle, and is not to be admired, 
even in nations fighting for their freedom. This is 
not to say that nations ought not to resist oppres- 
sion. It is to say that they should resist it from an 
international and not a merely national standpoint. 
The evils of nationalism, whether in a strong or 
weak nation, are connected with private property. 
They are concerned with exploitation or with the 
resistance to exploitation. It is therefore reasonable 
to suppose that, if private capitalism were abolished, 
the sinister part played at present by nationalism 
in education would be considerably diminished, 
though it might not wholly disappear. 

The fourth head in our consideration of the effect 
of economic causes on education is endowments. 
Wherever freedom of testamentary disposition exists, 
a man may leave his property to any object which 
is not considered contrary to public policy. Until 
recently, bequests for the propagation of rationalism 
were void in England, on the ground that rational- 
ism is contrary to the public policy of a Christian 

906 



EDUCATION AND ECONOMICS 

country ; now this is no longer the case. But although 
endowments for progressive objects may not be 
illegal, it is inevitable that endowments should, in 
the main, be a conservative force. They embody 
the wishes of men who are dead, often of men who 
have been dead for centuries. The Churches, the 
older universities, and many schools, depend to a 
greater or less extent upon ancient bequests. In 
America, endowments are largely recent, but, where 
they are, they come from eminent plutocrats, who 
are necessarily conservative and usually uneducated. 
They thus have a considerable effect in retarding 
progressive movements in education. A university 
president whose professors are suspected of radicalism 
is less likely to secure donations from philanthropic 
captains of industry than one whose colleagues show 
an unbroken front in favour of the status quo. 

Endowments have a considerable effect in making 
the religious side of education more conservative 
than it would otherwise be. The connection of 
religion with private property arises through the 
fact that men leave their money to religious bodies, 
and that this secures, for centuries after their death, 
the propagation of the particular brand of super- 
stition in which they believed. In England and 
Scotland, it is true, this can be altered by legis- 
lation. At the time of the Reformation, property 
left by the pious of the Middle Ages was diverted 
from its original purpose to the teaching of Angli- 
canism. When the property of the Free Chvurches 

ao7 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

in Scotland was judicially decided to belong by law 
to the Wee Frees, the law was altered so that the 
bequests of bigoted Predestinarians could be used 
to teach doctrines from which Predestination had 
been abolished. But in America the Constitution 
forbids such legislation. If you leave your money 
to an institution devoted to the doctrine that the 
inhabitants of Kentucky are the Lost Ten Tribes, 
the money cannot be diverted from that use. And 
in England, although diversion is possible, it is 
rare. The Anghcan Church, and the Roman Catho- 
lic Church, are wealthy bodies, whose income is 
only available to those who profess suitable doc- 
trines. There is thus an enormous economic motive 
for holding the same opinions as were held by 
remote ancestors. For every intellectual progress 
there is an economic penalty: when Colenso dis- 
covered that the hare does not chew the cud, he 
was docked of his salary. 

If there were no such things as religious endow- 
ments, it cannot be doubted that things would 
change much more quickly than they do. Even as 
it is, they change in fact more quickly than in form. 
There are many things which Anglican clergymen 
have to profess to believe, although it is open to 
them to say it is a mere profession, and no one 
thinks the worse of them if they do say so. Some 
parts of the body of Christian dogma have life at 
one time, and some at another. At the present time, 
for example, it is the view of most Christians that 
208 



EDUCATION AND ECONOMICS 


Christ’s observations on the subject of divorce are 
to be interpreted literally, while His sayings on such 
matters as non-resistance, abstinence from oaths, 
and giving of one’s property to the poor, are to be 
interpreted figuratively, as meaning the opposite 
of what they say. But the question which parts of 
Christ’s teaching it is permissible for a Christian 
to accept is a complicated one, which I shall not 
pursue further. 

The fifth head in our consideration of economic 
influences on education is tradition. I do not mean 
tradition in general, which is a much wider matter ; 
I mean tradition derived from some economic cause 
which operated in the past but does not operate in 
the present. Sexual morals, which are usually very 
conservative, afford the best illustration of this factor. 
In former days, when the world was less populous 
and infant mortality was high, couples performed 
a public service in having many children. Until 
education and the prohibition of child labour had 
made children a source of expense, children were 
often a pecuniary advantage to their parents. The 
sentiment against birth control and abortion had, 
in those days, a sound economic justification which 
is now lacking, but the sentiment persists because 
it has become associated with religion. 

The patriarchal family clearly had an economic 
origin, since women could not hunt successfully 
during pregnancy and lactation. Until recent times 
women had little opportunity of making an inde- 

aog 


o 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

pendent living, and were therefore forced to be 
dependent upon husbands or male relatives. The 
patriarchal family, involving support of wives and 
descent in the male line, led naturally to insistence 
on virtue in wives, enforced by very severe ethical 
and religious sanctions, and usually, in early civili- 
zations, by the death penalty for women guilty 
of adultery. While the legal penalty became lighter, 
and finally disappeared except in a few outlying 
regions such as New York State, the ethical and 
religious censures remained. This part of the con- 
ventional code, as we saw, is incompatible, in 
practice though not in theory, with the claim for 
the equality of women with men. Where women 
can earn their own living, their claim to equality 
is irresistible. Frantic efforts are made to prevent 
married women from obtaining employment, but 
it is not to be supposed that these efforts can have 
much permanent success. There will also be an 
increasing number of ways in which a woman can 
make a living without being of impeccable virtue 
from a conventional standpoint. The existmg moral 
code, therefore, is in process of breaking down from 
economic causes. Falling birth-rates, combined with 
militarism, are giving to the State an increasing 
interest in the welfare of children, since it is waste- 
ful, from the governmental point of view, for a 
male to die before he is old enough to be killed 
on the battle-field. Where economic causes combine 
to diminish the virtue of women, and to increase 


210 



EDUCATION AND ECONOMICS 


the share of the State in the maintenance of chil- 
dren, it is clear that the importance of fathers must 
diminish, and with it all those sentiments and moral 
precepts that are bound up with the patriarchal 
family. At present, parents and the State combine 
in thinking it good for children to be taught an 
outlook on sexual matters which comes from the 
past, and is not well adapted to the world of the 
present. This is an example of the conservatism of 
sentiment where sex and family are concerned. This 
conservatism is especially strong as regards educa- 
tion, since most people are of opinion that it can 
do the young no harm to be taught a very strict 
morality. Education, therefore, tends to prevent 
societies from adapting themselves to new needs 
as quickly as they ought, and causes many adult 
men and women to feel a horror, derived from their 
early training, in regard to things which it would 
be well to accept as a matter of course. While, 
therefore, economic causes have played a part in 
producing the sex morality which is taught in schools, 
these causes lie in the past, and find no justification 
in the economic needs of the present day. 

Although, as we have seen, economic causes con- 
nected with private property tend to make educa- 
tion conservative, it may be doubted whether it will 
be any less conservative under communism when 
once the revolutionary period is past. It will then 
be subject to completely unified bureaucratic con- 
trol, and bureaucrats are not, as a rule, very eager 


2II 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

for change. Perhaps there will then be less need of 
rapid change than there is now; perhaps mankind 
may be the better for a period of peaceful con- 
solidation. However that may be, the substitution 
of co-operation for competition as an educational 
ideal will remain a solid moral advance, which only 
a complete change in the economic system renders 
possible. On this ground alone it is legitimate to 
hope that education under communism will pro- 
duce better men and women than those that the 
West can produce while the present system persists. 


313 



CHAPTER XV 


PROPAGANDA IN EDUCATION 

Propaganda may be defined as any attempt, by 
means of persuasion, to enlist human beings in the 
service of one party to any dispute. It is thus dis- 
tinguished from persecution by its method, which 
is one that eschews force, and from instruction by 
its motive, which is not the dissemination of know- 
ledge but the generating of some kind of party 
feeling. It may differ from instruction in nothing 
but motive, since it may (though this is exceptional) 
consist entirely of accurate information; but even 
then it will consist of such information as tends in 
a given direction, to the exclusion of such as has 
a contrary tendency. Eulogy and invective, as op- 
posed to scientific psychological analysis, are both 
propaganda, though most men have enough virtues 
and enough defects to enable either to dispense with 
falsehood. In like manner it is possible to write the 
history of a nation from a friendly or a hostile point 
of view, and to confine oneself, in doing so, to true 
statements: the impression conveyed to the reader 
is incorrect, but only through its omissions. 

In all education, propaganda has a part ; no adult 
can avoid expressing his aversions and preferences, 
and any such expression in the presence of the young 
has the effect of propaganda. The question for the 

213 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

educator is not whether there shall be propaganda, 
but how much, how organized, and of what sort; 
also whether, at some stage during education, an 
attempt should be made to free boys and girls, as 
far as possible, from the influence of propaganda 
by teaching them methods of arriving at impartial 
judgements. 

The part played by propaganda in education has 
been continually increasing ever since the Reforma- 
tion. The first to perfect its technique were the 
Jesuits, who, by acquiring control over education, 
consolidated the gains made in the Counter-Reforma- 
tion. But the Protestants were not far behind; in 
England, for example, the Spanish Inquisition, the 
fires of Smithfield, and the Gunpowder Plot, were 
utilized to the full. The eighteenth century, as con- 
trasted with the seventeenth, was peaceful and fairly 
free from propaganda imtil the outbreak of the 
French Revolution. The wars of the eighteenth 
century, important as they were in their issue, were 
not very fierce, and did not prevent the combatants 
from respecting each other. But Jacobinism led to 
a sterner spirit in Europe, while in the long fight 
against Napoleon the English became insular and 
the Germans became patriotic. From that time to 
the present day the conflict between progress and 
reaction has grown more and more bitter, while 
nationalism has played an increasing part in the 
lives of ordinary men and women. At the present 
time different nations, and even different political 

a 14 



PROPAGANDA IN EDUCATION 

groups within the same nation, are completely 
separated, not only by their beliefs, but by what 
they know and do not know, by their judgements 
of prominent men, and by their hopes and fears for 
the future. 

Propaganda is first an effect, and then a cause, 
of the divisions which exist in the modern world. 
Before the Reformation there was a certain degree 
of unity in Europe; such heretics as existed were 
dealt with by persecution, and there was no neces- 
sity for propaganda in the modern sense. During 
the Wars of Religion, on the contrary, victory or 
defeat might turn on the power of making converts. 
The victory of France in the revolutionary wars was 
largely due to the energy and enthusiasm generated 
by Jacobin propaganda. Socialism and communism 
have been built up entirely by propaganda, and 
but for patriotic propaganda the nations would not 
have endured the sacrifices demanded of them in 
the Great War. 

Universal education has increased immeasurably 
the opportunities of propaganda. Not only is educa- 
tion itself everywhere propagandist, but the power 
of reading makes the whole population susceptible to 
the influence of the Press. This was the principal 
reason why the late war was more bitter than 
previous wars. People who had learnt to read, but 
had learnt nothing else, could be influenced by 
stories of atrocities, whereas in former times most 
people had either no education or a good deal, and 

215 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

were in either case comparatively immune. As this 
instance shows, propaganda has now an importance 
that it never had before. 

The main forms of propaganda are three; for 
political parties, for creeds, and for nations. The 
first of these cannot be overtly undertaken by the 
State, which can, however, engage in propaganda 
against very small parties, such as the communists 
in England and America. Propaganda for political 
parties is, in the main, not conducted in the course 
of education. Of course the atmosphere of a school 
for the rich is conservative, but most of the chil- 
dren would in any case grow up conservative, so 
that there is not much need of party propaganda. 
Creeds and nations are considered proper matters 
for propaganda in schools. Roman Catholics prefer 
to have their children educated in Roman Catholic 
schools; Protestants prefer a mild religious atmo- 
sphere which approximately expresses their beliefs. 
Every great nation causes a spirit of nationalism 
to permeate the State schools, and considers this 
one of the most valuable parts of the education of 
ordinary citizens. Under communism, nationalism 
is not taught, but there is a very intense propaganda 
for communism, combined with the information 
that the U.S.S.R. is its protagonist. It may be 
doubted whether the effect upon the minds of the 
children differs very greatly from the nationalism 
produced by education in capitalist countries. 

Propaganda in education is usually successful in 

2i6 



PROPAGANDA IN EDUCATION 

its object, unless there is some special reason for 
failure. The great majority of mankind accept the 
religion in which they were brought up, and the 
patriotism that they learnt at school. Children of 
immigrants in the United States become patriotic 
Americans, and usually despise their parents’ country 
of origin; this is mainly the effect of the schools. 
The only thing that causes nationalist propaganda 
to fail on a large scale is defeat in war. Most Rus- 
sians ceased to be patriotic in 1917, and many 
Germans ceased in 1918; most of these last, how- 
ever, were compelled by the Treaty of Versailles 
to abandon internationalism. Propaganda will not 
fail, as a rule, unless it attempts to make people 
believe something against which they have a strong 
initial repugnance. It was not found possible to 
make the Southern Irish feel British patriotism or 
adopt the Protestant religion. If propaganda is to 
succeed, it must inculcate something which makes 
some kind of instinctive appeal ; in that case, it can 
enormously increase the virulence of group feeling. 
Where some hatred already exists, it can intensify 
it; where some superstitious feeling lurks, it can 
seize hold of it and make it dominant; where a 
love of power is dormant, it can awaken it. But 
there are limits to what can be done by propa- 
ganda, both for good and evil. At least as yet. that 
is the case; perhaps, when mass psychology has 
been perfected, there will be no limits to what 
governments can make their subjects believe. 


ai7 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

Propaganda may be concerned with values, or 
with general propositions, or with matters of fact. 
Somewhat different considerations apply to these 
three cases. 

Ultimate values are not matters as to which 
argument is possible. If a man maintains that misery 
is desirable, and that it would be a good thing if 
everybody always had violent toothache, we may 
disagree with him, and we may laugh at him when 
we catch him going to the dentist, but we cannot 
prove that he is mistaken, as we could if he said 
that iron is lighter than water. If a prophet were 
to advance the theory that happiness should be 
confined to those whose first name begins with Z, 
he might receive the enthusiastic support of an 
army of Zacharys and Zedekiahs and Zebedees, but 
would ultimately be defeated by the solid legions 
of Johns eind Georges. This would, however, be 
only a pragmatic refutation of the prophet’s mes- 
sage, which would remain logically just as good as 
its contradictory. As to ultimate values, men may 
agree or disagree, they may fight with guns or with 
ballot-papers, but they cannot reason logically. 

In practical life, questions as to ultimate values 
hardly ever arise in their logical purity, since men 
are concerned with what should be done. Whether 
an act should be performed depends upon two 
considerations : first, what its effects are likely to 
be; second, whether these effects are on the whole 
good, or, more accurately, whether, on the balance, 

218 



PROPAGANDA IN EDUCATION 

they are better than the effects of any other act 
which is possible in the circumstances. Of these two 
questions, the first is scientific, not ethical, and is 
amenable to rational argument, like every other 
scientific question. It is only when a dispute as to 
what should be done turns on the second question 
that there is no theoretical possibility of deciding 
it by argument. 

In political disputes there tend to be two dis- 
agreements, one nominal, the other real. Every 
man, left to the unziided operation of instinct, would 
hold that his own happiness is the supreme good, 
that of his family comes next, while that of his 
nation, his party, and his co-religionists is to be 
desired so long as it does not conflict with his own. 
If he is an absolute monarch, he may retain this 
opinion through life. But if he is not (which is, after 
all, the commoner case), he can only get his way 
by the help of allies, and he can only acquire allies 
by at least appearing to pursue some object com- 
mon to him and them. As a rule, this appearance 
will be partly genuine, partly not. In so far as it 
is not genuine, it depends in part upon the gene- 
rating of emotion, in part upon fallacious reasoning. 
The part played by fallacious reasoning is larger 
than many modern irrationalists suppose. For ex- 
ample : from the end of the war until the autumn 
of 1931, British industry was sacrificed to British 
banking, because the bulk of British industrialists 
were persuaded by fallacious arguments advanced 

aig 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

by British bankers. Every political party, while it 
genuinely represents the interests of some group, 
endeavours to prove, by means of argument, that 
it represents the interests of other groups also; or, 
if no plausible argument is possible, it endeavours 
to produce the same result by means of excited 
emotion. In either case, disputes as to ultimate values 
do not occur, since no political party dare baldly 
avow the egoism of the group whose interests it is 
formed to further. Every political party asserts that 
it aims at the greatest possible happiness for the 
whole community, if not in this world, then in the 
next. Questions of ultimate ethical values, therefore, 
may be ignored in their intellectual form, though 
in emotional forms they retain political importance. 

From what has been said it follows that there is 
a considerable region, in political disputes, which 
is open to scientific argument. When one group 
contends that its interests are really identical with 
those of another, its contention can always in theory, 
and sometimes in practice, be proved or disproved. 
Imperialist nations maintain that backward nations 
(i.e. those without powerful armed forces) are hap- 
pier under their domination than they would be if 
they were free. Until women had the vote, men 
maintained that women were happier under male 
government than in a regime of sex equality. Cap- 
tains of industry maintain that wage-eairners, under 
their wise direction, are more prosperous than they 
would be if industry were subjected to public 


S20 



PROPAGANDA IN EDUCATION 

management. Such arguments generally convince 
a certain percentage of the subject group to which 
they are addressed; but as, in this case, they are 
not backed by self-interest, it is possible, when they 
are fallacious, to make this fact evident by argu- 
ment. And even the dominant group will lose self- 
assurance if its conviction of its own rightness can 
be shaken. Many French aristocrats in 1789, many 
Russian aristocrats in 1917, doubted whether the 
privileges of their order were justified, and but for 
this doubt the French and Russian Revolutions 
would have had more difficulty in succeeding. 

So much for the intellectual aspects of questions 
of value. In practice, however, the methods em- 
ployed in ethical propaganda are emotional rather 
than intellectual. Seeing that all judgements of value 
are based, in the last analysis, upon emotions, it is 
natural that ethical propaganda should be emo- 
tional. Nevertheless there are distinctions to be made 
as to the kinds of emotion that are generated and 
as to the methods by which this is done. 

Emotional propaganda may be direct or indirect. 
Uncle Tom's Cabin is direct propaganda; so is Ye 
Mariners of England. In direct propaganda, the object 
concerned is described in such terms as to rouse 
towards it the emotions desired by the propagandist. 
Indirect propaganda consists in arousing emotions, 
in themselves unconnected with the object, in cir- 
cumstances which establish an association with the 
object. This is the function of Church music, and 


231 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

of all music which is used in connection with some 
social group. The love that upper-class Englishmen 
feel for their public school is a complex sentiment, 
largely due to the fact that various strong social 
emotions have been felt in school crowds ; this sen- 
timent is sufficiently powerful to last through life 
and to have considerable political importance. The 
sentiment of Roman Catholics for the Church is 
bound up with the emotions that they felt in youth 
at midnight mass, at the solemnity of Good Friday 
and the joyfulness of Easter, at incense and dark- 
ness and mystery. When strong childish or adoles- 
cent emotions of this sort become associated with 
a political group, they may, and often do, generate 
a sentiment which is capable of overriding all 
intellectual convictions. This form of propaganda 
is best understood by the Catholic Church, which 
has had nearly two thousand years in which to 
perfect its technique. But the same sort of thing is 
done, though less perfectly, by national States, in 
such forms as martial music and military displays. 
In my childhood, British soldiers still wore the 
traditional red coats, and I remember vividly the 
delight of seeing regiments on the march. Such 
delights tend, unless counteracted, to produce a 
belief in militarism. 

Emotional propaganda has several dangers. In 
the first place, it is just as easily used in a bad 
cause as in a good one, perhaps more easily. Indeed, 
since rational conduct generally involves some con- 


S2S 



PROPAGANDA IN EDUCATION 

trol of the emotions, a form of propaganda which 
consists in arousing rather simple and uncivilized 
emotions cannot but be an obstacle to sensible 
behaviour. When war is coming, men rejoice that 
they can let their barbaric emotions have free play ; 
they experience a delight not wholly unlike that 
which a usually sedate person experiences when he 
falls in love. Both religion and patriotism appeal 
to very primitive emotions, which are dangerous 
to civilization. If men are to live closely packed 
together, they must have a careful social organiza- 
tion, and restrain their instinctive hostility to one 
another. The maintenance of so large a population 
as civilized countries at present contain is impos- 
sible if free rein is given to uncivilized passions, and 
therefore civilized men have a certain discomfort, 
an itch to return to more primitive ways of feeUng, 
to which the emotional propagandist appeals. War 
and religion are the politically most important forms 
of this kind of nostalgia. 

Another danger of emotional propaganda is that 
it tends to close the mind to argument. The con- 
scious mind may be rational, but just below the 
level of consciousness unalterable convictions re- 
main from eairly years. Many men, in quiet times, 
are internationalists and freethinkers, but when there 
is danger of war or death they become patriotic or 
religious. This, of course, is only partly due to early 
propaganda ; in a great measure, it is a natural effect 
of fear. But propaganda plays its part in enabling 

283 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

fear to disguise itself as something more respectable, 
such as love of country or love of God. 

Propaganda in regard to general propositions, 
such as rehgious dogmas, is conducted mainly by 
emotional means. To the CathoUc, for example, 
emotions which he cherishes are associated with 
the Catholic faith, so that without belief in certain 
metaphysical statements he would be unhappy. 
Where belief in a creed is concerned, it is, of course, 
theoretically possible to combat it by purely in- 
tellectual means, but this will not be successful 
except with a small percentage of exceptionally 
rational people. In general, when large numbers 
of men and women have abandoned a creed in 
which they had grown up, there has been some 
economic motive at work, though often uncon- 
sciously. The Reformation would not have had 
the success it had but for the Church lands and 
the tribute exacted by Rome. Socialists on the 
Continent have been, in the main, anti-Christian 
and have offered economic arguments to show that 
Christianity is in the interests of the rich. It is 
seldom that any rehgious creed has been success- 
fully combated by logic ; perhaps French eighteenth- 
century rationahsm is the most important instance. 
It is, however, desirable that reason should play a 
larger part than it does in determining men’s con- 
victions, or absence of convictions, on such matters 
as dogmatic rehgion deals with. The propaganda 
that attaches emotions, especially praise or blame, 
824 



PROPAGANDA IN EDUCATION 

to belief or disbelief in certain propositions, is an 
obstacle to the scientific spirit, and therefore to 
civilization. 

Although it is scarcely probable that governments 
will adopt the expedient of exposing the young to 
propaganda from opposite sides on important vexed 
questions, I have no doubt that this would be the 
best plan if it could be introduced. To demand of a 
teacher that he shall abstain altogether from express- 
ing controversial opinions is to demand that he shall 
be dull and shall suppress half his personahty. There 
are those, it is true, who have no party feelings, 
but they seldom make inspiring teachers. Nor is it 
desirable that education should artificially avoid 
all the questions upon which contemporary events 
turn. Young people should be encouraged to think 
about such questions by hearing them discussed 
from every point of view. Communism should be 
debated on the wireless on alternate Mondays by 
the Soviet Ambassador and Mr. Winston Churchill ; 
school-children should be compelled to listen, and 
after the debate had lasted three months each school 
should take a free vote. On Tuesdays, India should 
be debated between Gandhi and the Viceroy; on 
Wednesdays, Christianity, between Stalin and the 
Archbishop of Canterbury. This would be a real 
preparation for taking part in a democracy, and 
would teach the difficult art of extracting the truth 
from an ex parte statement. It is not propaganda as 
such that is at fault, but one-sided propaganda. 

225 


p 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

To be critical of propaganda, to have what is called 
in America “sales resistance,” is highly desirable, 
and is not to be achieved by remoteness from 
propaganda, any more than immunity from measles 
is achieved by remoteness from measles. It is achieved 
by experiencing propaganda and discovering that 
it is often misleading. For this purpose, no plan could 
be so suitable as rival propagandists in every school, 
for which broadcasting supplies the mechanism. 

It must, I think, be admitted that a certain 
amount of uncompensated propaganda is necessary 
for the minimum of social cohesion. While there 
may be occasions when law-breaking is a duty, they 
are few, and on the whole respect for law is desirable. 
If wars are ever to be avoided, there will have to 
be international machinery to settle disputes, and 
it will be necessary to teach respect for the body 
that makes the settlements. It might be argued by 
a pacifist that it is not the existence of propaganda 
that does the harm, but the existence of opposite 
kinds of propaganda; if, instead of each nation 
teaching its own nationalism, all taught admira- 
tion for the United States, there would no longer 
be any occasion for conflict between nations; and 
if all economic teaching throughout the world were 
communistic, or if till were capitalistic, the conflict 
between the Soviet Government and the govern- 
ments of the West would soon be terminated. So, 
I say, a pacifist might argue. But there would be 
several objections to such a plan. No progress would 

336 



PROPAGANDA IN EDUCATION 

be possible in a world where only one doctrine on a 
doubtful subject could be taught. And there would 
be no training in critical judgement in a world 
where no topic was ever debated. Propaganda must 
therefore be as diversified as possible, both for the 
sake of progress and for the sake of education in 
weighing pros and cons ; this is part of the objection 
to every kind of political censorship. 

One of the most important parts of education, 
and one of the most neglected, is that which teaches 
how to reach true conclusions on insufficient data. 
As a logician I am conscious of uttering what is, 
in strict logic, mere nonsense when I say this; 
nevertheless all success in practical life depends 
upon ability to perform this apparently impossible 
feat. The successful general is the one who guesses 
correctly what his opponent will do ; the successful 
organizer is the one who can choose good subor- 
dinates after brief interviews. Even the successful 
man of science makes a guess which afterwards is 
verified. In politics, the data are hardly ever suffi- 
cient to enable a rational man to reach a reasoned 
conclusion, but they are often such as to enable a 
man who is both rational and shrewd to reach a 
sagacious conclusion. To do this requires the scien- 
tific absence of bias and power of hypothetical 
thought, but it requires also something else — ^that 
quality which is vaguely called “judgement.” This 
is a quality which is greatly improved in any given 
direction by experience of the appropriate material. 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

Young people ought, at some stage in their educa- 
tion, to be taught political judgement, by listening 
to eloquence known in advance to be misleading, 
by reading partisan statements about past events 
and trying to infer what really happened, and so 
on. All this is the opposite of propaganda ; it is the 
technique for rendering men immune to propaganda, 

I am aware that, in what I have been saying, 
I have tacitly taken sides in a controversy which 
is very relevant to this issue. I have assumed that 
opinions can be true or false, not merely useful or 
harmful; I have assumed that it is, as a rule, at 
any rate where matters of fact are concerned, easier 
to know whether an opinion is true than whether 
it is useful ; and, finally, I have assumed that, as a 
general rule, it is more useful to believe what is true 
than what is false. All these assumptions may be 
challenged, and are challenged by pragmatists and 
communists. Let us therefore examine them more 
closely. 

It is said that Caesar was killed on the Ides of 
March, I have not examined the evidence with any 
care, but I have read the statement in various books 
which appear reliable, and I therefore believe it. 
In youth it may be useful to believe it, since it may 
be a help in getting through examinations; but 
when once the period of examinations is passed, 
this belief ceases to serve any useful purpose. At any 
rate, to come to our second assumption, it is clearly 
easier to know the truth of the proposition “Caesar 
238 



PROPAGANDA IN EDUCATION 

was killed on the Ides of March” than it is to know 
its utility, which, except to examinees, is extremely 
questionable. In saying this, I may seem to con- 
tradict my third assumption, namely, that as a 
general rule it is more useful to believe what is 
true than what is false. This is only correct when 
there is utility in one or other. Most propositions 
are not worth either believing or disbelieving. 
Imagine the multiplication table extended inde- 
finitely to larger and larger numbers : it would 
contain an infinite number of propositions, of which 
only a finite number would be useful in practice. 
But whenever, for some reason, one of these pro- 
positions is needed, it is in the highest degree im- 
probable that it will be better to get it wrong than 
right. It is not impossible, since you may have made 
a previous mistake which is just balanced by your 
new mistake. But this possibility is too remote to 
concern the politician, who rightly demands that 
children shall do their sums right. 

The case of arithmetic would perhaps be con- 
ceded by the communist, but in regard to con- 
troversial opinions he would maintain that there 
is a bourgeois view and a proletarian view, and 
that every good soldier in the proletarian army 
must hold the proletarian view. Take, for example, 
the question of immortality. The way to deal with 
this question, a communist would say, is not to 
examine the relation of soul and body or the evi- 
dence accumulated by psychical research, nor yet 

229 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

to suspend judgement on the ground that the 
evidence is insufficient for a decision, but to observe 
that the promise of heaven hereafter is used to make 
proletarians content with their lot here below and 
satisfied with lower wages than they would other- 
wise demand. The doctrine of immortality is thus 
made to appear as one of the weapons of capitalism, 
while its denial is one of the weapons of communism. 
The question of truth or falsehood does not enter 
in; one might as well ask whether a bullet is true 
or false. The important thing about a bullet is : 
which army does it serve? And exactly the same 
thing is what is important about an opinion. 

This view is, of course, a negation of the scien- 
tific attitude, which is that, over a large region, it 
is possible to discover approximate truth, and that 
where this is not possible suspense of judgement is 
the only rational attitude. Moreover, the communist 
does not hold consistently to his own sceptical posi- 
tion. Dialectical materialism is held to be really 
true, not only what it is expedient for a proletarian 
to believe. And the proposition that such-and-such 
a belief is expedient for the proletarian is also held 
to be genuinely true ; if it were not, it could not 
be made the basis of propagandist practice. The 
pragmatism of the communist is thus half-hearted, 
and little more than an expression of impatience. 

I conclude that there are truths, that they can 
sometimes be known approximately, that this is 
often useful, and that belief in falsehood is very 

830 



PROPAGANDA IN EDUCATION 

rarely useful. I conclude, further, that it should be 
one of the purposes of education to teach the young 
to reach correct conclusions wherever possible. 
Failure to do this promotes the bitterness of party 
spirit and the danger of destructive conflict, while 
on the intellectual side it gravely impedes scientific 
progress. All these things statesmen would do well 
to remember when they are tempted to view edu- 
eation as a mere branch of political propaganda. 


23* 



CHAPTER XVI 


THE RECONCILIATION OF INDIVIDUALITY 
AND CITIZENSHIP 

In our first chapter we proposed a question : Can 
the fullest individual development be combined with 
the necessary minimum of social coherence? This 
has led us to consider the various ways in which 
education is affected by politics and economics, 
most of which, we have found, are harmful to the 
boys and girls concerned. Is it necessary that the 
effects of politics and economics on the individual 
should always be harmful? Or is this a temporary 
misfortune of our own time? And, in the latter case, 
what hope is there of a greater harmony between 
individuality and citizenship in the not too distant 
future? 

The harm that is done to education by politics 
arises chiefly from two sources: first, that the in- 
terests of some partial group are placed before the 
interests of mankind ; second, that there is too great 
a love of uniformity both in the herd and in the 
bureaucrat. Of these two evils, the first is at present 
the greater; but if the first were overcome, the 
second might become very grave. 

It has been the custom for education to favour 
one’s own State, one’s own religion, the male sex, 
and the rich. In countries where various religions 



INDIVIDUALITY AND CITIZENSHIP 

exist side by side, the State is not able to favour 
any one of them in its schools, but this has led to 
the creation of schools belonging to various sects, 
or, as in New York City and Boston, to distortion, 
in the Catholic interest, of the history taught in the 
public schools.* The male sex can no longer be 
favoured as it used to be. But education, outside 
Russia, is still so conducted as to further the in- 
terests of the rich; and of course everywhere it 
teaches an exclusive loyalty to one’s own State. 

The result of this state of affairs is that education 
has become part of the struggle for power between 
religions, classes, and nations. The pupil is not 
considered for his own sake, but as a recruit: the 
educational machine is not concerned with his 
welfare, but with ulterior political purposes. There 
is no reason to suppose that the State will ever 
place the interests of the child before its own 
interests; we have, therefore, to inquire whether 
there is any possibility of a State whose interests, 
where education is concerned, will be approximately 
identical with those of the child. 

It is obvious that the first requisite for this pur- 
pose is the elimination of large-scale wars. If this 
were achieved by the establishment of an inter- 
national authority, the teaching of militant national- 
ism would no longer serve any purpose, and wovdd 
soon diminish to a point where it would be 

* In New York City, for example, teachers have to speak of the 
Reformation as “the Protestant Revolt.” 


233 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

innocuous. There would no longer be any need for 
Officers’ Training Corps, or for compulsory military 
service, or for the teaching of false history. Moral 
training would no longer have homicide as the apex 
of a virtuous life, to which everything else leads up. 
The establishment of an international authority 
sufficiently strong to impose its settlement of dis- 
putes upon recalcitrant States is, I am convinced, 
the most important reform from an educational as 
well as from every other point of view. 

There are, however, formidable obstacles to the 
establishment of such an authority — obstacles much 
more formidable than most paci&ts realize. Con- 
sider such an issue as that between communism 
and capitalism. It is extremely improbable that 
this issue will be settled peaceably: on both sides 
men consider it sufficiently vital to be worth fight- 
ing about, and it is difficult to imagine any inter- 
national machinery strong enough to prevent it 
from leading to war. Imagine (say) a civil war in 
Germany between communists and nationalists. 
Would France and Russia look on passively? If 
France and Russia joined in, would Great Britain 
remain neutral? Would the United States risk the 
spread of communism over the whole Continent 
of Europe? Would China and India fail to profit 
by the opportunity? Until the issue between com- 
munism and capitalism is decided in one way or 
another, world peace cannot be secure, whatever 
machinery may be created. And it is difficult to 

234 



INDIVIDUALITY AND CITIZENSHIP 

see how this issue can be decided except by the 
victory of communism, at any rate throughout 
Europe. Capitalism will no longer bring content- 
ment. Before very long, the general standard of 
comfort may be higher in Russia than elsewhere; 
the propagandist effect of such a state of affairs will 
be irresistible. It seems, therefore, not improbable 
that the shortest road to world peace lies through 
Russian propaganda. If so, it is short-sighted to 
object to the somewhat crude methods employed 
by the Soviet Government in teaching communism 
to its boys and girls. I do not positively assert all 
this; I merely suggest it as an hypothesis which is 
by no means improbable. 

It is, of course, clear that there cannot be secure 
peace until Germany ceases to be punished for 
having been defeated in the war. And this will not 
happen until France ceases to dominate Europe. 
And France will perhaps not cease to dominate 
except as the result of a war. 

It is doubtful, also, whether the liberation of 
India from the domination of England and of China 
from that of Japan can be achieved except through 
a first-class war. 

All these large questions will have to be solved 
before there is any serious hope of the preservation 
of peace by the creation of an international autho- 
rity. They may all be solved by the victory of com- 
munism within the next twenty years, but I am 
scarcely enough of an optimist to expect this. 


235 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

Next to the elimination of war, the most impor- 
tant requisite in the reconciliation of the individual 
and the citizen is the elimination of superstition. 
For this purpose, I define a belief as superstitious 
if its sole basis is traditional or emotional. When 
people consider the preservation of such beliefs 
important, they create systems of education involv- 
ing respect for the wisdom of our ancestors and a 
habit of deciding questions on other than rational 
grounds. Holders of power, almost inevitably, desire 
their subjects to be emotional rather than rational, 
since this renders it easier to make those who are 
victims of an unjust social system contented with 
their lot. Superstition thus becomes the natural ally 
of injustice, and only where the economic and 
political institutions are just is governmental educa- 
tion likely to promote a rational outlook. 

It is, of course, by no means certain that, if a 
just economic system were established as the result 
of a long conflict, it would, at first, be unaccom- 
panied by superstition. In war-time, false beliefs are 
used to generate enthusiasm, and a strict intellectual 
discipline is found useful in preventing doubts as to 
the importance of the cause. Russian communism 
already has its body of theological dogma, its hagio- 
logy, and its sacred history. If, after a century of 
struggle, the Russian doctrine converts the world, 
it will, in the interval, have created many myths 
and acquired great doctrinal rigidity. The man who, 
when that time comes, shall venture to say that 
236 



INDIVIDUALITY AND CITIZENSHIP 

Marx and Lenin were not the greatest men that 
ever lived, is likely to be considerably persecuted. 
It is possible — though I do not think it is probable — 
that the communist party may come to occupy a 
position somewhat similar to that of the Church in 
the Dark Ages. It is possible that the wars preceding 
the victory of communism will destroy all the in- 
dustrial plant in the world and cause the death of 
all men of science and competent technicians. In 
that case, when it is found recorded in the Scrip- 
tures that Lenin expected salvation from “Electri- 
fication,” people may wonder what this word meant, 
and may conclude that it denoted mystic union 
with Karl Marx. It is, therefore, not inconceivable 
that there may come to be a world State with a 
just economic system and nevertheless dominated 
by superstition. But this can hardly happen except 
on the hypothesis of appallingly destructive wars. 
On any other hypothesis, it is to be expected that 
the elements of superstition which are at present 
associated with the Soviet Government will fade 
when victory has removed the need of a war men- 
tality. In the long run, even a belief in communism 
will cease to seem important, since no other system 
will come within the purview of practical politics. 

I come now to a second danger, which is that 
of a too great love of uniformity. This may exist, a? 
we said before, both in the bureaucrat and in the 
herd. Children are instinctively hostile to anything 
“odd” in other children, especially in the ages from 

337 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

ten to fifteen. If the authorities realize that this 
conventionality is undesirable, they can guard 
against it in various ways, and they can, as was 
suggested in an earlier chapter, place the cleverer 
children in separate schools. The intolerance of 
eccentricity that I am speaking of is strongest in 
the stupidest children, who tend to regard the 
peculiar tastes of clever children as affording just 
grounds for persecution. When the authorities ako 
are stupid (which may occur), they will tend to 
side with the stupid children, and acquiesce, at 
least tacitly, in rough treatment for those who show 
intelligence. In that case, a society will be pro- 
duced in which all the important positions will be 
won by those whose stupidity enables them to please 
the herd. Such a society will have corrupt poli- 
ticians, ignorant school-masters, policemen who 
cannot catch criminals, and judges who condemn 
innocent men. Such a society, even if it inhabits 
a country full of natural wealth, will in the end 
grow poor from inability to choose able men for 
important posts. Such a society, though it may 
prate of Liberty and even erect statues in her 
honour, will be a persecuting society, which will 
punish the very men whose ideas might save it 
from disaster. All this will spring from the too 
intense pressure of the herd, first at school and 
then in the world at large. Where such excessive 
pressure exists, those who direct education are not, 
as a rule, aware that it is an evil ; indeed, they are 
938 



INDIVIDUALITY AND CITIZENSHIP 

qmte apt to welcome it as a force making for good 
behaviour. It is important, therefore, to consider 
what circumstances cause school-masters and edu- 
cation officials to fall into this error, and whether 
any system is likely to prevent them from doing so. 

There are, in the teaching profession, two very 
different types. There are those who have an en- 
thusiasm for some subject, and who love to teach 
it and implant their own enthusiasm in their pupils. 
On the other hand, there are those who enjoy the 
position of power and easy superiority, who like 
governing but have not enough skill to govern 
grown men. Some systems favour the former type, 
some the latter; modern efficiency tends more and 
more to favour the man who governs rather than 
teaches. I do not deny that the governing type has 
its uses: I once knew a lady who had taught in 
a public school in Texas, and had found it neces- 
sary always to come armed with a revolver. But 
except in remote and sparsely populated regions, 
boys or girls who are abnormally refractory can be 
isolated, with the result that those who remain, 
having lost their ringleader, will become amenable 
to less drastic methods. The teacher who is inspired 
by love of his subject, combined with affection for 
children, can in most circumstances achieve far 
more in the way of imparting knowledge and civili- 
zation than can ever be achieved by the man who 
loves order and method and efficiency but lacks 
knowledge and hates children. Unfortunately, in 

239 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

any large school there is a considerable amount of 
administrative routine, which is generally done best 
by the worst teachers; and as the higher autho- 
rities see the administrative work but are apt not 
to see the teaching, there is a tendency for credit 
to be quite wrongly apportioned. Moreover, in any 
great administrative machine the officials at the 
head of it naturally consider administration the 
most honourable and difficult kind of work, with 
the result that a better status and a higher salary 
are given to those who do the administrative work 
of schools than to those who actually teach. All this 
tends to produce the wrong type of teacher. It is 
the executive type that encourages uniformity, while 
the other type will rejoice in ability (which is in 
itself an eccentricity), and for the sake of ability will 
readily tolerate other forms of oddity. It is therefore 
very important, in combating the danger of uni- 
formity, to encourage teachers who love teaching 
rather than those who love governing. 

We come here upon one aspect of a problem 
which is likely to grow increasingly serious as the 
world becomes more organized. A man who has 
a position of power in a great organization requires 
a definite type of ability, namely, that which is 
called executive or administrative; it makes very 
little difference what the matter is that the organiza- 
tion handles, the kind of skill required at the top 
will be always the same. A man who can organize 
successfully (let us say) the Lancashire cotton trade 

240 



INDIVIDUALITY AND CITIZENSHIP 

will also be successful if he tackles the air defences 
of London, the exploration of Central Asia, or the 
transport of timber from British Columbia to Eng- 
land. For these various undertakings he will require 
no knowledge of cotton, no knowledge of aerial 
warfare, no knowledge of the buried cities of Tur- 
kestan, and no acquaintance with forestry or navi- 
gation. His helpers in subordinate positions will, 
in the several cases, require these several kinds of 
skill; but his skill is, in a sense, abstract, and does 
not depend upon specialized knowledge. It thus 
happens, as organizations increase in size, that the 
important positions of power tend, more and more, 
to be in the hands of men who have no intimate 
familiarity with the purposes of the work that they 
organize. While this is unavoidable, it has its dan- 
gers ; and, to return to our theme, it has its dangers 
in the sphere of education. 

In the sphere of education, the danger of the 
administrator arises through his love of classifica- 
tion and statistics. It is impossible that he should 
not have this passion, since he must deal quickly 
with vast masses of material, which only classifi- 
cation will enable him to do. Now in some kinds 
of material, classification is fairly satisfactory; this 
occurs where there are well-marked natural kinds. 
The greengrocer sells peas and beans and spinach 
and cabbage, and is never obliged to stop and ask 
himself: “Is this object a pea or a cauliflower?” 
With children the matter is otherwise. The question 

ft 241 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

whether a given child is mentally deficient is often 
a border-line question, to which, speaking scien- 
tifically, no precise answer can be given. But speak- 
ing administratively, a precise answer must be given : 
the child must either be sent to a special school 
or kept in the ordinary school. The administrator, 
therefore, looks about for some means of reaching 
a precision which does not exist in nature; this is 
one of the reasons for which he tends to love in- 
telligence tests. And what applies in the case of the 
mentally deficient applies also in the case of any 
other mental classification. The man who deals 
affectionately with a small group of children knows 
them as individuals, and feels things about them 
which it would be difficult to put into words ; often 
it is what is peculiar to a child that such a man 
likes best. But the man who views children from 
a distance, through a mist of official reports, is 
impatient of this sort of thing. He wishes all chil- 
dren were exactly alike, since that would make his 
work easy, but he is compelled to admit classifi- 
cation by age, sex, nationality, and religion. The 
most enlightened also admit classification by intelli- 
gence tests. But even the most enlightened like 
everything cut and dried, and forget the quality 
of individual life which makes each human being 
different from every other. For this reason there is 
a danger lest education officials should encourage 
a uniformity towards which, in any case, the world 
is tending. 

342 



INDIVIDUALITY AND CITIZENSHIP 

This is an administrative problem, and it has 
an administrative solution, namely, devolution. If 
there were a world-government, it would no doubt 
exercise a certain degree of supervision over all 
education: it would forbid excessive teaching of 
local patriotism, and it might prohibit doctrines 
which it considered subversive. But in all other 
respects it would, no doubt, leave education to be 
organized locally. If it were inspired by a scien- 
tific spirit, it would also permit various experiments 
in new methods. The experimental spirit is, at 
present, foreign to most administrators, but if 
education were more scientific it would become 
much commoner. It is to the growth of the experi- 
mental spirit that we must look for the toleration 
of loopholes and exceptions in the scientific State. 
Without loopholes and exceptions, there will be 
little progress and insufficient diversity; but this, I 
think, may come to be believed by ofiicials when 
they have all had a sound scientific education, not 
only in physics and chemistry, but also in biology. 

Individualism, although it is important not to 
forget its just claims, needs, in a densely populated 
industrial world, to be more controlled, even in 
individual psychology, than in former times. Those 
of us who have lived in large cities have all ac- 
quired ways of behaviour in crowds which are such 
as to prevent confusion : we keep to the right, move 
at the proper speed, and cross streets where we 
should. These are small and external matters, but 

243 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

something of the same sort is required in more 
serious concerns. St. John the Baptist used to go 
about insufficiently clad, exclaiming “Repent ye: 
for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.” If a man 
were to do this in London or New York, he would 
collect such a crowd that the traffic would be 
blocked, and the police would have to tell him that 
he must hire a hall before again uttering his sen- 
timents. Very few men in an industrial society are 
independent units in their work; the vast majority 
belong to organizations, and have to carry out 
their portion of a collective undertaking. A sense 
of citizenship, of social co-operation, is therefore 
more necessary than it used to be; but it remains 
important that this should be secured without too 
great a diminution of individual judgement and 
individual initiative. 

If a man’s life is to be satisfactory, whether from 
his own point of view or from that of the world at 
large, it requires two kinds of harmony : an internal 
harmony of intelligence, emotion, and will, and 
an external harmony with the wills of others. In 
both these respects, existing education is defective. 
Internal harmony is prevented by the religious and 
moral teaching given in infancy and youth, which 
usually continues to govern the emotions but 
not the intelligence in later life, while the will is 
left vacillating, inclining to one side or the other 
according as emotion or intelligence has momen- 
tarily the upper hand. Such conflicts could be pre- 

244 



INDIVIDUALITY AND CITIZENSHIP 

vented if the young were taught doctrines which 
adult intelligence can accept. This can be done in 
private schools on a small scale, but without the 
co-operation of the State it cannot be done on a 
sufficiently large scale to produce results having 
other than experimental importance. 

The matter of external harmony with the wills 
of others is more difficult, and not capable of a 
complete solution. Competition and co-operation 
are both natural human activities, and it is difficult 
to suppress competition completely without destroy- 
ing individuality. But it is not individual and un- 
organized competition that does the harm in the 
modern world. Two men may compete for the same 
woman without harm to any one, provided their 
rivalry stops short of murder. The dangerous form 
of disharmony in the modern world is the organized 
form, between nations and between classes. So long 
as this form of disharmony persists, the world can- 
not enjoy the advantages which science and tech- 
nical skill have made possible. The disharmony 
between nations is encouraged by education in the 
present day, and could be brought to an end by 
the introduction of internationalist propaganda in 
schools. This, however, is hardly possible without 
a previous victory of political internationalism. 
Education can consolidate political achievements, 
but is not likely to cause them so long as it is con- 
trolled by national States. 

There have been times when competition in the 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 

form of war was advantageous to the victors. Those 
times are past. It is obvious now, to every thinking 
person, that every nation would be happier if all 
armed forces everywhere were disbanded and all 
disputes between nations were settled by an inter- 
national tribunal and all tariffs were abolished and 
all men could move freely from one country to 
another. Science has so altered our technique as 
to make the world one economic unit. But our 
political institutions and beliefs lag behind our 
technique, and each nation makes itself artificially 
poor by economic isolation. We invent labour-saving 
devices and are troubled by unemployment. When 
we cannot sell our products, we cut down wages, 
under the impression, apparently, that the less men 
earn the more they will spend. All these evils arise 
from one source, that, while our technique demands 
co-operation of the whole human race as a single 
producing and consuming unit, our passions and 
our political beliefs persist in demanding compe- 
tition. 

Our world is a mad world. Ever since 1914 it 
has ceased to be constructive, because men will 
not follow their intelligence in creating international 
co-operation, but persist in retaining the division 
of mankind into hostile groups. This collective 
failure to use the intelligence that men possess for 
purposes of self-preservation is due, in the main, 
to the insane and destructive impulses which lurk 
in the unconscious of those who have been unwisely 
246 



INDIVIDUALITY AND CITIZENSHIP 


handled in infancy, childhood, and adolescence. In 
spite of continually improving technique in pro- 
duction, we all grow poorer. In spite of being well 
aware of the horrors of the next war, we continue 
to cultivate in the young those sentiments which 
will make it inevitable. In spite of science, we react 
against the habit of considering problems rationally. 
In spite of increasing command over nature, most 
men feel more hopeless and impotent than they 
have felt since the Middle Ages. The source of all 
this does not lie in the external world, nor does it 
lie in the purely cognitive part of our nature, since 
we know more than men ever knew before. It lies 
in our passions ; it lies in our emotional habits ; it 
lies in the sentiments instilled in youth, and in the 
phobias created in infancy. The cure for our prob- 
lem is to make men sane, and to make men sane 
they must be educated sanely. At present the various 
factors we have been considering all tend towards 
social disaster. Religion encourages stupidity, and 
an insufficient sense of reality; sex education fre- 
quently produces nervous disorders, and where it 
fails to do so overtly, too often plants discords in 
the unconscious which make happiness in adult 
life impossible; nationalism as taught in schools 
implies that the most important duty of young men 
is homicide; class feeling promotes acquiescence 
in economic injustice; and competition promotes 
ruthlessness in the social struggle. Can it be won- 
dered at that a world in which the forces of the 


247 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 


State are devoted to producing in the young in- 
sanity, stupidity, readiness for homicide, economic 
injustice, and ruthlessncss — can it be wondered at, 
I say, that such a world is not a happy one? Is 
a man to be condemned as immoral and subversive 
because he wishes to substitute for these elements 
in the moral education of the present day intelli- 
gence, sanity, kindliness, and a sense of justice? The 
world has become so intolerably tense, so charged 
with hatred, so filled with misfortune and pain that 
men have lost the power of balanced judgement 
which is needed for emergence from the slough in 
which mankind is staggering. Our age is so painful 
that many of the best men have been seized with 
despair. But there is no rational ground for despair : 
the means of happiness for the human race exist, 
and it is only necessary that the human race should 
choose to use them. 


248 



INDEX 


abstract knowledge 43 
acquiescence 14 
Adams family, the 150-1 
administrative routine in edu- 
cation 240-3 

agitation and propaganda in 
Russian Schools 184, 187, 
192 

agriculture 1 83 
Albigenses, the 16 
Alexander the Great 95 
Anglicans 71, in 
aristocracy 82-5, 92, I45”6, 
150, 154-6, 202 
arithmetic and mathematics 
166 

A Scientist Among the Soviets y 
Huxley’s 183 
authority 1 6 

authority as opposed to per- 
suasion 4 1 

Aylward, Miss Beryl 144 

“back-to-nature” cult, the 

35 

bed-wetting 59 
behaviourist method of train- 
ing character, the 60, 192 
Bergson 103 

boarding schools 65, 68-9 
Boy Scouts 185 
British upper class, the 77, 
82 

broadcasting 226 
Buddhism 16-17, 103 
bureaucracy 85-6, 2 1 1 


business enterprise 202-3 
business management 155 
Byzantines, the 17, 22 

calculating boys 49 
Caliphate, the 17 
capitalism 146-7, 156, 161, 
187, 202, 205, 230, 234-5 
Cathari, the 16 
Catholicism, Roman 1 6, 7 1- 
2, 222, 224 

children’s drawing and paint- 
ing 163 

China 26, 76-7, 103, 199, 

235 

Christian ethics and super- 
stition 115-16 
Christianity 15,17,103,112- 
16, 126-9, 188-9, 224-5 
Church and education, the 
56, 71-2, 105 

citizen versus individual 9- 
10, 12, 14, 18, 21, 27-8, 
232, 236, 243-4 
citizenship as an ideal 13,24 
class inequality 145, 149, 

, 189 

classics, the 87, 197-8 
cleanliness 34-5 
Co-education 186-7 
combination 1 6 1 
communal playgrounds 68 
Communism 1 7, 30, 74, 1 27, 
148, 156, 178, 180-1, 187, 
189-95, an, 215-16, 225, 
228-30, 234-7 


249 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 


Communism and capitalism, 
the issue between 234-5 
companionate marriage 125 
competition 160-3, 

177, 191, 203-4, 212, 245-7 
compulsion in education 32- 
3 , 42-3 

conformity 99 
Confucianism 1 6 
conservatism 20-1 
Constantine 1 5 
conventionalism 89,98-100, 
105, 238 

co-operation, social 26-7, 36, 
56, 71, 131, 161, 177, 212, 
245-6 

Coventry 144 
culture 86~7, 153-4 

Darwin 1 60 

day schools versus boarding 
schools 65-70 
Democracy 83-5, 169, 188 
discipline, rigid 40- 1 
disharmony 245 
Disraeli 91-2, 155 
distribution, the system of 
201 

ecclesiastical origin of Euro- 
pean education 1 96-7 
economics and education 
196-212 
Education 

its object 9, and the 
State 14, 18, 27, 65, 70-3, 
86, 233, and the Church 
15,56,71-2, in the Middle 
Ages 15, in America 19, 
250 


26, 31, 83-4, 154-5, 1 70- 1, 
in citizenship 18, 25, 

X\it status quo 20-1, diver- 
gent theories of 29, as a 
means to social conformity 
30, freedom in 32-4, 36, 
40, in punctuality 36-7, 
and heredity 45-55, and 
the herd 88-99, 
gion 101-16, 233, and 
sex 1 1 8-30, 2 1 1 , patriot- 
ism in 135, 137-44, and 
the social order 148-59, 
“of a gentleman” 156-7, 
166, competition in 160- 
3, 169-70, 177, 204, in 
Soviet Russia 178-95, and 
economics 1 96-2 1 2 , pro- 
paganda in 213-16, 225, 
administrative routine in 
240-3 

emotional propaganda 221- 

4 

emotions 11-12, 31, 57-8, 
60-4, 69, 74, 109-10, 144, 
148, 159, 169, 175, 219, 
222, 224, 244, 247 
Emperor, the 1 7, 56 
Enclosure Acts, the 78 
endowments 206-8 
environment 45, 191 
equality of women with men 
210 

ethics 1 15 
eugenists 51-2 
European versus American 
education 1 62 
examinations 1 70, 1 76-7, 
191, 228 



INDEX 


experimental spirit, the 243 

fallacious reasoning 2 1 9-22 
family and State 76, 190 
fatigue 1 65-6 
flag, reverence for the 136- 
7. 205 

Ford, Henry 203 

France 84, 104, 235 

freedom 62-3 

Freud 58, 119 

future life 107-8, 1 13,229-30 

Gallon 54 

gentleman, definition of a 

154 

George, Henry 202 
Germany 119,235 
gestation 120-1 
Gifted Children^ Hollingworth’s 
171 

Goddard 45 
Godwin 47-50 
Goethe 10 

good of the individual , t he 10 
governmental use of science 

23> 25 

Greeks, the 153--4 

harmony in life 244-5 
hatred, the child and 32-3 
Hebrew prophets, the 103, 

Hegel 103 

herd-instinct 56, 58, 88-99, 
237-8 

heredity and environment as 
factors of character 45, 50, 
53-3 


heredity 45-7 

History, teaching of 140, 

143, 175 

Hogben 45 

home education 65-6, 69- 
70. 72, 74 
honesty 37-8 
Huxley, J ulian 1 83 
hygiene 34-5 

idiocy 49 
imagination 162-3 
imperialism 205 
India 77, 103, 235 
individual, definition of the 
good 10, 12 

individual versus citizen 9- 
10, 12, 14, 18, 21, 27-8, 
232, 236, 243-4 
industrialism, evolution of 
1 60-1 

inheritance 145, 147, 202- 
3 

injustice, social 1 59 
institutional elements of reli- 
gion 103-4 
intellect 165, 17 1-2 
intellectual impartiality 114 
intelligence tests 52-3, 170 
intelligent disagreement 168 
international authority 234- 
5 

Islam 17, 103 

Jacobinism 214-15 
Japan 16, 76, 80, 126, 135, 

235 

Jesuits, the 214 
Jews and Gentiles 91-2 

251 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 


Judgment and Reasoning in the 
Childy Piaget’s i66 

kindliness 41 
kleptomania 37-8, 59 
knowledge 11-12 
Kropotkin 93, 97 

labour and the school curri- 
culum 1 83-4 
land-owner, the 146, 202 
Latin America 26 
League of Nations 140,143 
Leibniz i o 
Lenin 180, 190, 237 
life insurance 73 
Lindsey, J udge 1 2 5 
literature, teaching of 164-5 
Locke 65 
love 1 1 

lying to children 121,129 

McMillan, Margaret 67 
Mahomet 1 7 
man as an individual 12 
manual work 153, 182-3 
Marx, Karl 91-2, 147, 184, 
188-90, 193-4, 237 
masturbation 119,124 
Mexico 76 
Mill, John Stuart 65 
mind versus body 151-3 
music 185, 221-2 

Napoleon 94, 98, 214 
nationalism 139, 142, 144, 
205-6, 214, 216, 226, 233, 
247 


negative theory of education 
29-30, 44 
Newton 193 
Nordics, the 45, 47 
nursery schools 66-8, 187, 
200 

organizations 13 1-3 
Orphic religion 103 
orthodoxy 21-3 
I over-education 162, 168, 
174-5, 204 

parents 73-4, 98-100, 190, 

I 21 1 

Parmenides 103 
paternity of the State 127-8 
patriarchal family, the 125- 
9, 147, 178, 202, 209-11 
patriotism 1 9, 76-7, 98, 1 35, 
138-42, 185, 205, 217, 223, 

' 243 

patriotism and finance 142 
Pavlov 1 65-6 
personal religion 103-4 
• Peru 76 

philosophy of communism, 
the 193 
Piaget 166 

Pinkevitch, Albert P. 179-84 

Plato 1 03 

play 62 

Plotinus 1 03 

Plutarch 1 54 

plutocracy 146-7, 150-1, 

202-3 

Poland 206 

political and non-political reli- 
gions 16-17 



INDEX 


political element in Christi- 
anity, the 1 5 

political judgment 227-8, 
248 

political liberalism 30 
political standpoint of com- 
munism, the 194 
politics and education 232 
poor, children of the 149 
Pope, the 1 7, 56 
power 1 1 

pragmatism 24, 218, 228, 
230 

Press, the 138,215 
private property, the system 
of 127-8, 148, 21 1 
proletarian, the 146-7, 180- 
I, 190, 230 

propaganda 184, 187, 192, 
213-18, 221-8, 230, 235 
property, sources of 146 
Protestantism 16, 103, 214 
public schools, the 58, 78- 
82, 87, 105, 123 
punctuality 36 
Pythagoras 13-14 

raw materials 146 
rebellion 14, 192 
religion in education loi, 
104, 106-16, 188 
religions 16-17, 

188, 247 

religious endowments 206-8 
reverence for birth 150 
revolutionary, the 20-1, 64, 
202 

Roman tradition, the 76-7 
Romans, the 154 


Romantic Movement, the 3 1 
Rousseau 30, 65 
routine, importance of 39 
Russia 17-20, 72, 75, 77, 
140, 178-95, 198-9, 235 
Russian education 178-95, 

Samoa 1 24 

sceptic, dogmatist, and scien- 
tist 23 

scholarships 16 1, 169, 202 
School herd, the 88-100 
school-leaving age, raising of 
the 200 

school-masters and sex psy- 
chology 119-20 
school-teachers and propa- 
ganda 225 

school-teachers and religion 
108 

science 22-3, 109, 174, 189, 
i93> 199? 201, 230, 243, 
246-7 

sex 117-30, 186-8, 21 1, 247 
sex equality 127-9 
social element in school edu- 
cation 164 

social inequality 145, 149, 

Socialism 18, 30, 147-8, 215 
socially useful work in schools 
183-4 

Soviet Russia 140, 147, 156, 
178-95, 216, 226, 235-7 
special schools 97, 170-2, 
238 

Spinoza 103 

Spiritual Franciscans, the 1 6 

253 



EDUCATION AND THE SOCIAL ORDER 


State and education, the 14, 
18, 27, 65, 70-3, 86, 233 
State and family 76-7 
State and King 76-7 
State as father, the 127 
State, functions of the 133- 
4 

status quo, the 2 o~ i , 1 00, 1 44, 
158 

superstition, elimination of 
236 

Taoism 103 
tariffs 246 

teaching 173, 175-6, 225, 
239-40 
Terman 45 
The Legacy of Israel 197 
The New Education in the 
Soviet Republic^ Pinkcvitch’s, 

179 

thieving 38 

Thirty-Fifth All Russian Con- 
ference on Pre-School Edu- 
cation 184-5 
Tibet 1 6 

Tom Brownes Schooldays 97 
trade-unionism 1 6 1 
tradition 209 
truth 23-5, 109-10, 230 
twins, identical 46-7 
tyranny of older children 96 


ultimate values 2x8, 220-1 
imconventionalism 98 
United States, education in 
the 19, 26, 31, 83-4, 154- 
5, 162, 171, 179, 191 
universal compulsory educa- 
tion 182, 198-9, 215 
universities, the 156-7, 169- 
70, 198 

urban children 66-9 
U.S.S.R. see under Soviet 
Russia 

voluntary attendance in class 
42, 167 

war 27, 63, III, 140, 185, 
217, 223, 226, 233, 236-7, 
246-7 

Watson, Dr. J. B. 47, 49- 

50, 63 

Watt, James 10 

wealth, reverence for 150, 

153 

wealth, sources of 145, 148, 
202-3 

will, the 12, 82 
wisdom 1 1 

world State, the 27, 72, 237, 

243 

Young Pioneers, The 185-6 


254 




GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD 
London: 40 Museum Street, W.C.i 
Cape Town: 73 St. George’s Street 
Sydney, N.S.W.: Wvnyard Square 
Auckland, N.Z. ; 41 Albert Street 
Toronto: 91 Wellington Street, West 



By BERTRAND RUSSELL 

The Scientific Outlook 

La. Cf. 8 uo. 75 . 6d 

‘Full of life and wit and gaiety and, let us add, wisdom and knowledge 
. . . It is admirably written, and contains passages of singular beauty 
... It is perhaps needless to say that the whole book is important.''— 
Manchester Guardian 

“One of the best discussions of the place of science in life, its relatiou 
to human ends, and to the problems of morals and society." — Sunday 
Times 

“Clarity of thought ... an undaunted facing of unpleasant facts ... an 
understanding of his subject ... all these are here and, perhaps most 
fascinating of all, a subtle and devastating irony that lightens even 
his gloomiest forebodings." — Week-end Review 


The Conquest of Happiness 

La. Cr. Svo. Fourth Impression. ys. 6d, 

“Beautifully planned and written. . . . The author knows just what he 
wants to say, and says it brilliantly. ... A definitely helpful book, and 
one that should be kept and consulted in those dark hours that beset 
us all." — Spectator 

“He writes what he calls common sense, but it is in fact uncommon 
wisdom. ’ ’ — Observer 

'i 

Marriage and Morals 

La. Cr. Svo. Fourth Impression. ys. 6d. 

“An audacious and provocative book, in which truths are spiced with 
half-truths, and Mr. Russell’s scepticism and his dogmatism wage their 
familiar conflict." — New Statesman 

“Mr. Russell's book is very important because it is a statement and 
to a large extent an advocacy of what he calls the ‘newer morality' by 
a thinker world-renowned." — Evening Standard 

All prices are net 


LONDON: GEORGE ALLEN & UNWIN LTD 





